 
 
Feynman on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, with 
Updates 
 
Eric Mjolsness 
 
Departments of Computer Science and Mathematics 
University of California, Irvine  
emj@uci.edu 
 
Abstract 
 
I present my recollections of Richard Feynman’s mid-1980s interest in artificial intelligence and neural 
networks, set in the technical context of the physics-related approaches to neural networks of that time. I 
attempt to evaluate his ideas in the light of the substantial advances in the field since then, and vice versa. 
There are aspects of Feynman’s interests that I think have been largely achieved and others that remain 
excitingly open, notably in computational science, and potentially including the revival of symbolic 
methods therein. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Richard Feynman’s role in sparking the development of quantum computing is well known, as 
well as his affinity for calculating machines. Less well known is that he was seriously interested 
in artificial intelligence, and in neural networks in their 1980s incarnation as an approach to 
artificial intelligence, a subject led at Caltech by John Hopfield who had recently arrived as a full 
professor.  
 
2. Selected Reminiscences 
 
The Physics of Computation course began as a collaborative offering between Feynman, 
Hopfield, and Carver Mead, the pioneer of very large-scale integration (VLSI) computer chip 
design, who was also interested in neural computation as a new hardware paradigm. Feynman 
thought quite a bit about how to achieve progress in artificial intelligence (AI) that had eluded 
the mainstream symbolic approach, through neural networks instead, and particularly in their 
capabilities for pattern recognition and machine learning (ML). 
 
As a physics graduate student at Caltech from 1980-1985, I was very fortunate to have many 
interactions with Richard Feynman, some of which bear on his interest in neural networks and 
artificial intelligence. To me these years at Caltech seemed like a time of great intellectual 
ferment in multiple overlapping directions. What follows is reconstructed from decades-old 
fallible memory. Others will almost surely remember things a bit differently. 
 
Today neural networks are so successful that it is becoming hard to understand how non-
mainstream such thinking was at the time. Neural networks had lost the evolutionary race with 
von Neumann computer architectures in the late 1950s and early 1960s, despite pioneering 
hardware work by Frank Rosenblatt, Bernard Widrow, and others. Enthusiasm and funding for 
neural network research had also suffered from the reception (but not the actual text) of the book 

 
 
on “Perceptrons” by Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert which included negative results on 
what we could now call single-layer feed-forward neural networks without hidden units. But  in 
the early 1980s John Hopfield, Geoffrey Hinton, Terry Sejnowski, Kunihiko Fukushima and 
others were trying to revive neural networks, with new quantitative dynamical algorithms and 
architectures. Feynman was interested (along with other physicists) because of the physics-like 
characteristics of this approach. The essence of a neural network could be described in 
quantitative terms, mostly by equations, at a higher level of abstraction than computer code. 
Feynman certainly knew Hopfield’s work well; how much he knew about other neural network 
research is harder to say because he preferred to reinvent everything independently, from first 
principles. 
 
At MIT Marvin Minsky was pioneer of artificial intelligence of the classic non-neural 
!symbolic” variety, and Feynman and Minsky were friends. As Feynman became interested in 
AI, somehow a deal was struck by which Minsky recommended that Papert’s former doctoral 
student, Gerald Sussman, also prominent in mainstream symbolic AI as well as programming 
languages, should visit Caltech on an extended sabbatical where he could interact with Feynman 
on AI … and also, execute his plan to build a cost-effective special-purpose “digital orrery” 
planetary orbit computer. So Gerry Sussman collaborated on the Physics of Computation course 
too, delivering lectures on hardware, on programming using his own Scheme dialect of Lisp, and 
on AI. 
 
The role in which I knew Feynman best was as a teaching assistant for the Physics of 
Computation class in several iterations from 1983-1985. Also, as a physics/neural network PhD 
student of John Hopfield, I was deputized to push the buttons and flip the tapes on a tape 
recorder for many of Feynman’s lectures. Feynman was democratically-minded, and very often 
after class he would continue the discussion with his TAs and a changing cast of visitors 
including Sussman, at the Institutes’ unpretentious cafeteria a few steps away. (US universities 
have evolved; the cafeteria became more pretentious.) Sometimes we would instead go to the 
Caltech Atheneum, the faculty club that also welcomed graduate students. Another TA for later 
iterations of this course was the remarkable physics graduate student Mike Douglas, then master 
of the digital orrery software and knowledgable in AI, later of string theory renown. Needless to 
say, the lunch discussions were fascinating and sometimes spectacular. The TAs sometimes also 
met Feynman in his office. I heard his voice ringing in my ears for years afterwards. 
 
It is well known that Feynman had a leading role in organizing the computing effort at Los 
Alamos during the Manhattan Project in World War II, from 1943-1945. The “computers” of the 
day were human operators working on mechanical calculators, but the information flow among 
them had to be designed somehow. During the 1980s lunchtime socializing we heard previews of 
many of Feynman’s Los Alamos and other stories that subsequently showed up in his later, 
memoir-like books. It is also well reported that in the mid-1980s, during the time of the Physics 
of Computation classes, he consulted for the Thinking Machines computer company. He worked 
on the bit-serial message-routing protocol for their highly parallel Connection Machine CM-1 
computer and performed an analysis of its need for message overflow buffers. Also during this 
time, he undertook the quantum computing work described elsewhere in this book. These 
contemporaneous projects were described in the class. So his interest in computing was broad 
and long-lived. 

 
 
 
Feynman had various dream projects that he didn’t get time to finish. He died just a few years 
after giving these lectures, in 1988 at the age of 69. He wanted to think and visualize his way 
through the configuration space of quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the strong nuclear 
force, in order to deeply understand it the way he had visualized his way through several famous 
problems in statistical physics. And he wanted to train, shape, or perhaps evolve a neural 
network to achieve artificial intelligence, complete with vision and language. The neural 
network/learning machine (details were a bit sketchy) was apparently going to be person-like and 
female. “She” would master one skill after another, like a human baby, trained by doting 
scientists who would supply the right learning tasks in the right order. 
 
Gerry Sussman, who was by far the most knowledgable AI expert on the AI-skeptical Caltech 
campus during his visit, did not love the Feynman plan for neural network style learning 
machines. He thought it was naive, harking back to the late-1950 – early-1960 ideas that had not 
panned out. On the other hand mainstream AI was just entering the “AI winter” phase of 
decreased confidence and funding, so Sussman could not win an argument on the future of AI 
outright, based on the accomplishments of the field at that time. Feynman in turn thought 
Sussman’s “problem is he knows too much” about current AI research (he probably knew all of 
it, as the field was much smaller then), so Sussman couldn’t see that the real progress was going 
to come from a completely different direction. These mutual diagnoses emerged only under 
fairly persistent questioning by the younger scientists present. In retrospect of more than 30 
years, after the great strides in neural networks for computer vision and natural language of 2010 
– 2020, Feynman looks to have had the decisive advantage in this symbolic vs. neural AI debate 
… but as I will suggest, things could change again! 
 
3. Physics-like Neural Networks of the 1980s 
 
We can use Feynman’s approach to statistical mechanics to understand Hopfield’s neural 
networks, and closely related networks. In particular, Feynman’s variational method (e.g.[1], 
Section 3.4) allow us to understand key aspects of such neural networks. We will make a 
mathematical analogy between a network of idealized “neurons” that interact only with their 
neighbors in a network of connections, on the one hand, and a rigid lattice of simplified “atoms” 
that interact only with their neighbors in a solid material, on the other. The common theme is the 
use of real-number connection or interaction strength values 𝑇𝑖𝑗 that specify whether, and how 
strongly, and with what ± sign two network nodes (either neurons or atoms, indexed by integers 
i and j) influence one another. When 𝑇𝑖𝑗= 0 then there is no network or lattice connection and 
no direct influence between nodes i and j, and for large systems we can imagine this is the most 
common case. It is the nonzero connection strengths that specify the “network”. A major point of 
difference between neural networks and solid material models in physics will be that the 
connection strengths in a neural network are allowed to change under some dynamics of 
learning. 
 
For the physics-based material model we assume the Boltzmann probability distribution of 
equilibrium statistical mechanics: The probability of a state 𝑝Boltz(state) ∝𝑒−𝛽Energy(state). This 
proportionality makes sense because energy is extensive (additive over noninteracting 

 
 
subsystems), and probability is multiplicative over independent subsystems, such as networks 
that comprise unconnected subnetworks. 
 
3.1 Neural activation dynamics 
 
Next we establish the conventional statistical mechanics context, exhibit Feynman’s convexity 
inequality, derive a mean field theory, and apply it to neural network activation dynamics. 
 
For a Boltzmann distribution, the free energy 𝐹(𝛽, 𝑇, ℎ) = ⟨𝐻⟩−𝑇𝑆 of an equilibrium 
statistical mechanics model on classical atomic “spin” variables 𝑠𝑖∈{±1} satisfies 
 
 
 
 
 
𝑒−𝛽𝐹= 𝑍(𝛽, 𝑇, ℎ) =
∑
{𝑠𝑖∈{±1}}𝑒−𝛽𝐻[𝑠]  , 
 
 
(1) 
where for an Ising model, for example, 
 
 
 
 
𝐻Ising[𝑠] ≡−1
2 ∑
𝑖≠𝑗𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗−∑
𝑖ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑖 
 . 
 
 
(2)  
(In this notation 𝛽= 1/𝑇 is the inverse temperature, angle brackets denote thermal averages 
with respect to the Boltzmann probability 𝑝!"#$%[𝑠] = 𝑒&'([*]/𝑍, and 𝑆= −⟨log𝑝[𝑠]⟩ is 
entropy. We use units in which Boltzmann’s constant 𝑘𝐵 is unity; otherwise we would have 𝛽=
1/𝑘,𝑇. The connection strength matrix 𝑻is symmetric and may be sparse and/or structured. 
Don’t confuse the indexed connection matrix 𝑻= [𝑇CD] with the scalar temperature parameter 
𝑇.) To verify equation (2), it suffices to substitute 𝑝!"#$% into 𝑆. We could also interpret the 𝑠𝑖∈
{±1} variables as idealized binary-valued neuron number 𝑖 being “on” vs. “off”, or “firing” vs. 
“not firing”. Below we will seek energy-minimizing dynamics for “analog” real-valued neurons, 
whose real values are derived as probabilities of firing vs. not firing. This derivation proceeds by 
way of Mean Field Theory. 
 
Since the free energy 𝐹 and the “partition function” 𝑍 may be hard to calculate, we compare 
them to their values in some related system (𝐻E, 𝐹E) chosen to be easier to calculate: 
 
 
 
𝑍=
∑{"#}.%&((["]%(+["]).%&(+["]
/
.%&(+["]
{"#}
𝑒&'0+ = ⟨𝑒&'((&(+)⟩3𝑒&'0+ 
From the convexity of the exponential function, Feynman points out that 
 
 
 
 
⟨𝑒FG(HFH")⟩E ≥𝑒FG⟨HFH"⟩" 
and therefore 
 
 
 
𝑒−𝛽𝐹= 𝑍= ⟨𝑒−𝛽(𝐻−𝐻0)⟩0𝑒−𝛽𝐹0 ≥𝑒−𝛽⟨𝐻−𝐻0⟩0𝑒−𝛽𝐹0 
whence 
 
 
 
𝐹≤𝐹E + ⟨𝐻−𝐻E⟩E    or    𝐹≤⟨𝐻⟩E −𝑇𝑆E . 
 
 
(3) 
Of course, Feynman actually does this for path integrals and quantum systems. This key 
inequality, relating quantities (𝐹 and 𝑍) that may be hard to calculate to quantities that are much 
easier to calculate, is sometimes attributed to Gibbs, Bogoliubov, and Feynman. 
 
Now from equation (3) we can derive the Mean Field Theory (MFT) approximation choosing an 
independent product distribution of all the classical spins, i.e. 𝐻0 = ∑𝑖𝜇𝑖𝑠𝑖= −∑𝑖𝑢𝑖𝑠𝑖 . Then 

 
 
𝑇𝑆E = −∑C𝑢C⟨𝑠C⟩E −𝐹E where −𝛽𝐹E = ∑Clog(2cosh𝛽𝑢C). The variational bound can be 
calculated as  
 
𝐹≤⟨𝐻⟩E −𝑇𝑆E = −
L
M ∑
CND
𝑇CD⟨𝑠C⟩E⟨𝑠D⟩E −∑
C
(ℎC −𝑢C)⟨𝑠C⟩E −
L
G ∑
C
log(2cosh𝛽𝑢C) 
Calculating ⟨𝑠C⟩E = −∂𝐹E/ ∂𝑢C , or equivalently minimizing this upper bound with respect to 
𝑢𝑖, yields 𝑣𝑖≡⟨𝑠𝑖⟩0 = tanh(𝛽𝑢𝑖) where 𝑣𝑖∈(−1,1). Then we can eliminate 𝑢𝑖 from 
variational bound in favor of 𝑣𝑖. The bound becomes: 
 
 
𝐹≤𝐸OPQ[𝑣] ≡−
L
M ∑
CND
𝑇CD𝑣C𝑣D −∑
C
ℎC𝑣C + ∑
C
𝜑(𝑣C) 
 
 
(4) 
where 𝜑(𝑣) =
L
G [𝑣tanhFL(𝑣) −log(2cosh(tanhFL(𝑣)))]. Since tanh−1(𝑣) = 1
2 log(1+𝑣
1−𝑣) for 
𝑣∈(−1,1), we find 
 
 
 𝜑(𝑣) =
L
G [(
LTU
M )log(
LTU
M ) + (
LFU
M )log(
LFU
M )] = −𝑇𝑆OPQ[𝑣],  
which is another ∑𝑝log𝑝 entropy expression since (1 ± 𝑣)/2 ∈[0,1] and they sum to 1.  
 
The quality of the approximation of equation (4) is naturally measured by how close the right 
hand side 𝐸MFT[𝑣] comes to the left hand side quantity 𝐹, with the best possible approximation 
of this class being obtained by minimizing 𝐸MFT[𝑣] as a function of all the 𝑣𝑖 . We could do this 
algorithmically, or we could consider some dynamics for 𝑣𝑖 that seeks a minimum, and then 
implement that on a computer or more directly in analog electronic hardware. 
 
So, in addition to fast equilibration of the vector 𝒔= [𝑠] of spins 𝑠𝑖, we now imagine a slower 
time-scale dissipative dynamics that acts irreversibly to minimize the approximating free energy 
as modeled by 𝐸MFT[𝑣]. The derivative of the potential 𝜑(𝑣) is tanh−1(𝑣)/𝛽, so 𝐸MFT[𝑣] is 
minimized at 𝑣𝑖= tanh(𝛽𝑢𝑖≡−𝛽∂𝐸𝐼𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔[𝑣]/ ∂𝑣𝑖), i.e. 
 
 
 
 
 
𝑣𝑖= tanh(𝛽∑
𝑗𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑣𝑗+ 𝛽ℎ𝑖)   
 
 
 
(5) 
at a local minimum. Once an energy-minimizing system has reached an isolated local minimum 
of the energy, it can go no further and must stop - it has reached a “fixed point” of the dynamics. 
So equation (5) is the fixed-point equation for Hopfield’s “analog” (real-valued, 𝑣𝑖∈(−1,1)) 
neural network. Similarly, for MFT and {0,1}-valued “neurons” or “units” we obtain the entropy 
expression 𝜑(𝑣) =
L
G (𝑣log𝑣+ (1 −𝑣)log(1 −𝑣)), whence  𝑣= 𝑔(𝑢) = 𝑒G\/(1 + 𝑒G\)) =
1/(1 + 𝑒"#$).  
 
More generally, 𝜑(𝑣) = ∫
U𝑔FL(𝑣)𝑑𝑣 where 𝑔 is the artificial neuron’s (monotonic) activation 
function. Then the fixed-point equation becomes 
 
 
 
 
𝑣𝑖= 𝑔𝑖(∑
𝑗𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑣𝑗+ ℎ𝑖) . 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
One can also allow the potential function 𝜑 and the activation function 𝑔= 𝜑]FL to depend on 
the variable index 𝑖 as indicated in equation (6), while retaining the useful energy-minimizing 
optimization property of the network with 𝐸[𝑣] = −
L
M ∑CND𝑇CD𝑣C𝑣D −∑CℎC𝑣C + ∑C𝜑C(𝑣C), but 
either of these generalizations gives up the derivation from equilibrium MFT. 

 
 
 
Hopfield also introduced a descent dynamics capable of finding these fixed-points by energy 
minimization [2]: 
 
 
 
𝑣𝑖= 𝑔(𝑢𝑖)    and    𝜏𝑖
𝑑𝑢𝑖
𝑑𝑡+ 𝑢𝑖= ∑
𝑗𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑣𝑗+ ℎ𝑖 . 
 
 
(7) 
Input to the system can be provided through 𝒉 or through the initial condition 𝒗(𝑡= 0). This 
architecture was applied to small combinatorial optimization problems, such as the Traveling 
Salesman Problem. 
 
This variational MFT derivation generalizes naturally [3] from Ising “spins” 𝑠𝑖∈{±1} to Potts 
model discrete state variables which take one of a fixed finite number of values 𝑞𝑖∈{1, … 𝐴} 
that we can encode using 𝑠𝑖𝑎∈{0,1} and  𝑞𝑖= ∑𝑎𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑎 , where  ∑𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑎= 1. Then the potential 
energy function becomes 𝜑([𝑣C⋆]) =
L
G ∑c𝑣Cclog𝑣Cc = −𝑇𝑆
˜
[𝑣] (the entropy of the 𝑖th soft 
choice distribution) and the activation function is: 
 
 
 
𝑣𝑖𝑎= 𝑒𝛽𝑢𝑖𝑎/∑
𝑏𝑒𝛽𝑢𝑖𝑏  ,  where  𝑢𝑖𝑎≡∂𝐸𝑃𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑠[𝑣]/ ∂𝑣𝑖𝑎 . 
 
(8) 
This is the well-known “soft-max” activation function, which softly (depending on parameter 𝛽) 
chooses among a finite set of alternatives so as to maximize 𝑢𝑖𝑎 over index 𝑎, automatically 
obeying the constraints 𝑣𝑖𝑎≥0 and ∑𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑎= 1. Its usage and importance have steadily 
increased over time since it provides a differentiable choice over more than two alternatives. A 
further natural generalization is to the “soft-assign” fast dynamics which alternates row and 
column normalizations like equation (8) and converges to a solution satisfying the constraints of 
a doubly stochastic or “assignment” matrix: 𝑣𝑖𝑎≥0, ∑𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑎= 1, and ∑𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑎= 1 . The soft-assign 
architecture was applied to a number of semi-symbolic problems (e.g. [4]) bordering on the 
cognitive. 
 
3.2 Neural learning dynamics 
 
In a somewhat looser manner, we can use statistical mechanics ideas to obtain learning dynamics 
in neural networks. We allow the symmetric, real-valued connection matrix 𝑇 to become 
dynamic by analogy with the activation spin variables, adding a potential function Φ(𝑇CD) 
chosen here so the resulting activation function Φ′−1 for 𝑇𝑖𝑗 will be linear: 
 
 
 
 
𝐻[𝑠, 𝑇] = −𝐴∑
C
ℎC𝑠C −𝐵∑
ChD
𝑇CD𝑠C𝑠D + 𝐵∑
ChD
Φ(𝑇CD)  
 
(9) 
 
 
 
 
 
Φ(𝑇) =
L
Mi 𝑇M  
where the parameters 𝐴≥0 and 𝐵≥0 have different relative sizes in learning mode vs. recall 
mode. In learning mode 𝐴≫𝐵 is large so 𝒔 tracks and binarizes the externally imposed input 
vector 𝒉, and 𝑇 adapts to that input. At low temperature, energy is minimized and the matrix 
entry 𝑇𝑖𝑗 is driven down the gradient ∂𝐻/ ∂𝑇CD towards 𝑇𝑖𝑗= 𝑐𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗 . For example, one may use 
dissipative dynamics 
 
 
 
 
 
𝜏𝑇
𝑑𝑇𝑖𝑗
𝑑𝑡+ 𝑇𝑖𝑗= 𝑐𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗 .  
 
 
 
(10) 

 
 
If members of a small set of input vectors {𝒉} are imposed repetitively, and the learning rate 
1 𝜏k
⁄
 is low enough, then the binarized input vectors 𝒔 will get averaged over the input 
population: 𝑇𝑖𝑗→𝑐⟨𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗⟩population. On the other hand, in recall mode, 𝐵≫𝐴 and the learning 
rate is zero, so 𝑇
·
= 0 and at low temperature the activation state 𝒔 falls into whichever local 
minimum of  −∑ChD𝑇CD𝑠C𝑠D best aligns with the current input 𝒉 or 𝒔(𝑡= 0).  
 
The resulting computational functionality is that of a “content addressable memory”, which 
retrieves a learned memory by its similarity to an input vector, as was demonstrated 
computationally for a discrete-time version of this learning rule in [5]. It has similarities to the 
Boltzmann machine learning algorithm [6], and even to Rosenblatt’s (1962) perceptron learning 
rule. Equations like (10) that model connections or “synapses” 𝑇𝑖𝑗 as strengthening or weakening 
depending on coincidence or correlation between the “neurons” they connect, also realize 
“Hebb’s rule” for synaptic plasticity mediating learning as proposed in neurobiology. 
 
Another important learning rule can be derived as follows, starting with equations (6) and/or (7). 
If we impose a sparsity pattern on the weights 𝑇 by partitioning the neurons (units) into layers 
indexed by 𝑙∈0, … 𝐿, with nonzero connection weights only allowed between adjacent layers 
(𝑙−1, 𝑙) (or more generally from earlier to later layers), and if we further scale such weights by 
a factor of 𝜀𝑙 where 𝜀→0, and allow a compensating layer-dependent 𝛽∝𝜀4 parameter in the 
activation functions 𝑔𝑙(𝑣𝑖𝑙), then layer 𝑙 effectively only receives input from layer 𝑙−1 and not 
from layer 𝑙+ 1. The result is a feed-forward multilayer neural network, often called a 
“multilayer perceptron” (MLP), with solution dynamics obtained simply by updating the fixed-
point equation 
 
 
𝑣𝑖𝑙= 𝑔(𝑢𝑖𝑙)  where  𝑢𝑖𝑙= ∑
𝑗=1
𝐽𝑙
𝑇𝑖𝑗
(𝑙)𝑣𝑗𝑙−1 + ℎ𝑗𝑙−1 = ∑
𝑗=1
𝐽𝑙+1
𝑇𝑖𝑗
(𝑙)𝑣𝑗𝑙−1 ,  
(11) 
once for each layer in succession, ordered by increasing layer number. Here the convention 
𝑣𝐽𝑙+1𝑙≡1 and 𝑇56-78
(4)
≡ℎ94&8  obviates the need for a separate learning rule for the biases ℎ𝑗𝑙. 
 
Now learning can proceed by following a gradient with respect to the weights 𝑇𝑖𝑗, that can be 
efficiently calculated. One imposes an objective function on the output activations 𝑣𝑗𝐿 in the last 
layer, such as 𝐸(𝑇) = ∑s𝐸s(𝑇) where 𝐸𝑝(𝑇) = 1
2 ∑𝑖(𝑣𝑖𝐿−𝑦𝑝𝑖)2 , and where 𝑝 indexes input 
pattern vectors 𝑥𝑖= 𝑣𝑖0
(𝑝) and we have suppressed extra (𝑝) indices on the activations. Now we 
just need to use the chain rule to find all the derivatives recursively, by assuming every 𝑢 and 𝑣 
activation variable depends on all the weights of its own and earlier layers. By this means we 
will learn an approximate mapping (function) from input vector 𝒙 to output vector 𝒚. 
 
For any layer 𝑙> 0 we can differentiate 𝑢𝑖𝑙 in equation (11) to find 
 
 
 
uv(
uk)*
(,) =
uv(
u\),
u\),
uk)*
(,) ≡𝛿C
(w)𝑣DwFL 
(again suppressing 𝑝 indices). We need to find the 𝛿s. For output layer 𝐿 in particular, we can 
differentiate 𝐸𝑝 and 𝑣𝑖𝑙 in equation (11) to find 

 
 
 
 
 
 𝛿𝑖
(𝐿) ≡
∂𝐸𝑝
∂𝑢𝑖𝐿=
∂𝐸𝑝
∂𝑣𝑖𝐿
∂𝑣𝑖𝐿
∂𝑢𝑖𝐿= (𝑣𝑖𝐿−𝑦𝑝𝑖)𝑔′(𝑢𝑖𝐿) . 
 
 
(12) 
For any other layer 𝑙−1 ≥0 except the last one, we can differentiate equation (11) to find 
 
 
 
 
𝛿𝑖
(𝑙−1) ≡
∂𝐸𝑝
∂𝑢𝑖𝑙−1 = ∑
𝑘
∂𝐸𝑝
∂𝑢𝑘𝑙
∂𝑢𝑘𝑙
∂𝑢𝑖𝑙−1 = 𝑔′(𝑢𝑖𝑙−1)∑
𝑘𝛿𝑘
(𝑙)𝑇𝑘𝑖
(𝑙) 
i.e. 
 
 
 
𝛿𝑖
(𝑙−1) = 𝑔′(𝑢𝑖𝑙−1)∑
𝑘𝑇𝑖𝑘
(𝑙)transpose𝛿𝑘
(𝑙) , 
 
 
 
(13) 
in which the sum over 𝑘 is a matrix multiplication in the (𝑖, 𝑘) index space. This method is 
sometimes called the “generalized delta rule”. It emerges from this calculation that the crucial 
error signal Δ𝑖𝑙 travels backwards through the layers of the network, by the transpose of each 
layer’s weight matrix. Hence the algorithm’s name, “backwards propagation of error” or just 
“backpropagation”. 
 
Now we have the ingredients for continuous descent dynamics 𝜏𝑇𝑑𝑇𝑖𝑗
(𝑙)/𝑑𝑡= −𝜂cont ∂𝐸/ ∂𝑇𝑖𝑗
(𝑙) 
= −𝜂}~•€∑s ∂𝐸s/ ∂𝑇CD
(w) = −𝜂}~•€∑s𝛿C
(sw)𝑣DwFL
(s) , or discretized in time to first order: 
 
 
 
Δ𝑇CD
(w) = ∑sΔs𝑇CD
(w) = −𝜂∑s𝛿C
(sw)𝑣DwFL
(s)   
 
 
 
(14) 
where 𝜂= 𝜂}~•€Δ𝑡/𝜏k > 0. The more cost-effective “stochastic gradient descent” version of 
this rule is just to update according to one input pattern 𝑝 at a time as in equation (10): Δ𝑇CD
(w) =
Δs𝑇CD
(w) = −𝜂ΔCw
(s)𝑣DwFL
(s) . 
 
Equation (13) is pregnant with consequences. It implies that a many-layered (“deep”) network 
will have both products of many factors of 𝑔:, each of which can be quite large or small, and 
many factors of 𝑇(𝑙)transpose potentially resulting in a large matrix condition number. The 
resulting numerical problems fomented an accumulation special methods or “hacks” to deal with 
them. One of the most common is weight decay: adding a regularizer 
•
M ∑wCD(𝑇CD
(w))M to the 
objective 𝐸, whose negative derivative then shows up in the gradient descent dynamics for 
learning. 
 
Besides the layer-stratified weight matrix 𝑇(𝜀→0) mapping used above, there is another, more 
rigid way to map Hopfield analog neural networks into multilayer feed-forward neural networks: 
one can “unroll” or “unfold” them by adding a discretized time index. For example, a forward 
Euler solution method for equation (7) could be expressed as 
 
 
𝑣𝑖𝑘= 𝑔(𝑢𝑖𝑘)    and    𝜏𝑖
𝑢𝑖𝑘−𝑢𝑖𝑘−1
Δ𝑡
+ 𝑢𝑖𝑘−1 = ∑
𝑗𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑣𝑗𝑘−1 + ℎ𝑖+ 𝑂(Δ𝑡2) 
and approximated by discrete-time dynamics 
 
 
𝑣𝑖𝑘= 𝑔(𝑢𝑖𝑘)    and    𝑢𝑖𝑘= (1 −Δ𝑡
𝜏𝑖)𝑢𝑖𝑘−1 + Δ𝑡
𝜏𝑖(∑
𝑗𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑣𝑗𝑘−1 + ℎ𝑖)  
(15) 
Even if 𝜏𝑖≠Δ𝑡 equation (15) is very close to the form of equation (11), especially after 
absorbing the relative time factors into 𝑇 and ℎ. So this architecture supports a modified “delta 
rule” for learning by backpropagation of error. Alternatively, there are several slightly 
generalized forms of (10) that can provide a common generalization of (11) and (15), complete 

 
 
with a delta rule for backpropagation learning. For example, one can add extra linear units 
(𝑔𝑖(𝑢𝑖) = 𝑢𝑖) to convey the 𝒖 information of layer 𝑙−1 forward to layer 𝑙. The more 
substantial difference between (15) and (11) is actually one of specialization: In (15), all layers 
have the same connection matrix 𝑇𝑖𝑗
(𝑙) = 𝑇𝑖𝑗 , whereas in (11) they generally differ.  
 
This reduction of parameters is one example of “weight sharing”, whereby the full connection 
matrix (respecting an architecture’s pattern of sparsity) is a function of some smaller number of 
parameters 𝜃, and the chain rule is used to create a version of backpropagation that computes 
gradients with respect to 𝜃 from backpropagated gradients with respect to free weights 𝑇. 
 
In this way we obtain a family of gradient descent learning algorithms for Hopfield-style 
continuous time analog neural networks with feedback, a type of “recurrent neural network”. 
Better ODE integration schemes will give rise to somewhat more complex learning algorithms. 
The method can be generalized to other differential equations with other kinds of parameters 
than neural networks. In the continuous limit Δ𝑡→0 we recover the “adjoint method” for locally 
optimizing parameters in a differential equation model, again with the training signals flowing 
backward in time. 
 
 
 
4. The AI/ML Spring 
 
So, what has changed since the 1980s? And which changes would have resonated with 
Feynman? 
 
Neural networks are usually specified with a combination of algebraic equations with free 
(learnable) parameters, and illustrated by block diagrams showing how variables are connected 
to one another in these equations. The total amount of information to specify the architecture is 
usually very small indeed, compared to that required by a computer program aimed at a similarly 
nontrivial problem in perception, pattern recognition, or many other successful applications. 
Almost all of the information in a trained network comes instead from the data set used to train 
it, and is stored in the large number of learned parameters: the numerical “weights” by which one 
artificial neuron or “unit” influences another. 
 
The field of neural networks has gone through several transformations since the 1980s. Some of 
the innovations that can be expressed in simple equations include:  
" Fukushima#s neurobiologically inspired “neocognitron” networks,  
" Hopfield’s optimizing or energy-minimizing networks (e.g. equation (7) above),  
" Boltzmann (probabilistic) machines,  
" Backpropagation of error through feed-forward multilayer perceptrons (variants and 
specializations of equations (11) and (13) above),  
" Deep convolutional networks (essentially, a neocognitron network with backpropagation of 
error learning),  
" “Soft-max” mixtures of experts,   

 
 
" “Soft-assign” correspondence-optimizing networks,  
" Regularization methods such as “weight decay” and random unit “dropout” that promote 
successful generalization,  
" Restricted Boltzmann machines,  
" Graphical probabilistic models,  
" Latent semantic spaces,  
" Variational autoencoders,  
" Long short term memory,  
" Residual networks,  
" Tensor networks,  
" “Transformer” architectures based on soft-max “attention” equations incorporating 
equation (8) above,  
" Graph neural networks, and  
" Multiscale/multigrid neural networks, 
among many others. 
 
Other kinds of learning architectures that are mathematical and specified by equations, without 
necessarily being neural networks, include: 
" Self-organizing maps,  
" Kernel methods,  
" Manifold learning, and  
" Information geometry. 
Often practitioners encounter these architectures in the form of computer code or somewhat ill-
defined diagrams. But what is essential to specify are the relatively compact equations, and 
ample training data. This combination sounds like theoretical and experimental physics. In an 
odd temporal coincidence, and as shown in this book, both Feynman and Hopfield wrote down 
Hamiltonians as simple equations describing nontraditional computing machines; Feynman for 
quantum computing (1986, and presented earlier in the Physics of Computation class), and 
Hopfield for neural networks (1982). The Boltzmann Machine of Ackley, Hinton and Sejnowski 
(1985), too, has a statistical physics Hamiltonian description. 
 
Other aspects of neural network performance enhancement are more procedural than 
mathematical. One procedural approach to regularization is !early stopping” of a training 
optimization algorithm. Another example is Feynman’s advocacy of a carefully designed 
sequence of learning tasks, related to what is known in animal training as “shaping”. This occurs 
in current neural network practice as “transfer learning” and is very effective across many 
domains - although the sequence may be less important than the collection of learning tasks on 
which the same network is jointly trained (“multi-task learning”) - and also to “lifelong learning” 
which is more or less what it sounds like. And paradigms such as reinforcement learning and 
unsupervised learning each start with a different premise about how data from the world is to 
enter into the training process. 
 

 
 
At this point I must apologize to my many colleagues whose own great architectures and 
algorithms did not happen to get onto the foregoing lists. I am barging through decades of high-
quality research, and laying waste to nuance. 
 
With these machine learning architectures and procedures, vast improvements have taken place 
in the decade 2010-2020. As is now widely known, these improvements have resculpted the 
classic AI areas of computer vision, natural language, robotics, game-playing, and recently even 
theorem-proving which was the ne plus ultra of symbolic AI (Newell and Simon’s Logic 
Theorist, 1956; Robinson’s resolution-based theorem proving, 1965). Commercial and industrial 
applications are legion. There are now many domains in which it is not possible to be 
competitive without using machine learning. Even the practice of the hard sciences, including 
physics, is starting to feel an influx of AI/ML methods adapted to include scientific knowledge, 
under banners such as “physics-informed machine learning”. 
 
Some of the best known and most influential recent successes in neural networks include 
AlexNet [7] which was a milestone in computer vision, AlphaGo [8] and AlphaZero (2017) for 
playing the intellectually demanding board games of Go and Chess, and the Generative Pre-
Trained Transformer GPT-2 [9] that generates readable natural language text in response to 
natural language prompts. These examples go far towards answering classic challenges that were 
identified right from the beginning of AI (for example, early computer vision at MIT, “Los 
Alamos chess” without bishops on a 6x6 board, and the “SHRDLU” and “ELIZA” text 
interaction programs - all running on computers of miniscule capacity by current standards). 
These notable examples involve neural network training of tens of millions to tens of billions of 
parameters, and they comprise a complete revolution in the field by comparison to AI 
capabilities in the mid-1980s. But more importantly, using the kinds of techniques listed above, 
there is now a vast array of successful applications. An increasing fraction of high-technology 
industry, including the hardware and software that we all interact with every day, is dependent 
on neural networks and related machine learning trainable models. Consequently, a very large 
amount of computing goes into their training every day. 
 
What would Feynman have thought of all all these advances? Remembering his commitment to 
having a personal, independent point of view on everything, and the impossibility of emulating a 
great mind, there can be little certainty on this point. Nevertheless it seems to me that: 
 
1. He would be very comfortable with the data-driven nature of the field, which was developing 
but far from universal in pre-1980s symbolic AI, and with the fact that serious validating 
computer experiments with some kind of “real data” are universally expected as part of the 
development of new techniques. This characteristic may be partly due to the large influx of 
physicists and other quantitatively-minded people into the field.  
2. However, Feynman reviewed experiments critically. He expounded that in science !you are 
the easiest one [for you] to fool”, in his classes and public lectures. I think he might be 
guarded about AI/ML methodological and sociological problems such as stopping upon 
success, selective reporting of best-among-competitors performance, community 
overtraining on benchmarks, and related sources of what he called “too much happy talk” in 
science. 

 
 
3. He would be enthusiastic about transfer learning, and about the particular neural 
architectures that have led to success in vision, natural language, and limited combinations 
thereof. These methods have essentially achieved the goals of the machine learning project 
that he had in mind - insofar as he had expressed them. 
4. Regarding equations as the hidden currency of learning architecture, he might be of two 
minds: attracted because he was a mathematical master; repelled because the source of his 
mastery was the ability to deeply visualize the meaning of each equation. Neural network 
equations for the most part are just not that conceptually deep. In the old AI dichotomy of 
“scruffy” vs. “neat” research approaches, ML equations might be neat but not neat enough. 
5. He would not be too worried about the large number of small, apparently unconnected hacks 
required to get all these successes, nor about their lack of connection to the neurobiology of 
living “neural” networks. For example, it was just an empirical matter to him, whether 
computer chess programs would eventually work better by brute force search or by expert-
derived heuristics. In the old AI dichotomy of !scruffy” vs. !neat” approaches, “scruffy” but 
functional is fine, as advocated by Minsky. 
6. He might nevertheless be intrigued by conceptually deeper, less ad hoc architectures that 
connect to physics, such as manifold learning (clearly related to general relativity), and 
perhaps by attempts to connect neural networks to real neurobiology.  
7. He might be skeptical of the “causal inference by structural equations” approach to infusing 
AI/ML into reasoning in the softer sciences, because it has no real dynamics and it does not 
address the main causality problem, namely of fitting into the multiscale and reductionist 
perspective on science that he expounded as early as his 1964 Messenger lectures [10]. At a 
fundamental level at least, “causality” is better stated in quantum field theories by Feynman 
propagators and by the spacelike commutation and anticommutation of operators. 
8. Because of his deep commitment to physics, Feynman would be quite interested in - if also a 
bit skeptical of - the “physics-informed machine learning” agenda which is now being 
pursued with many different architectures, representations, and methods for the purpose of 
doing computational physics, chemistry, and biology. If I had to pick one thing about 
present-day neural networks, machine learning, and AI that Richard Feynman would be most 
interested in, this would be it. 
9. He would certainly have creative and potentially powerful new ideas that are not yet on 
anybody’s list or agenda. 
 
 
 
5. AI/ML for Computational Science 
 
To a theoretically-minded scientist, one of the most exciting things happening in AI/ML today 
(as I write in 2021) is its burgeoning adoption into computational science. The interesting neural 
network architectures for this purpose are those that incorporate physical or other scientific 
principles and constraints into their searchable function spaces. For example, many-electron 
quantum mechanics can be tackled using variational methods (of which Feynman was a master, 
e.g. [1]) with wave function bases that incorporate Slater determinants for permutation 
antisymmetry; one neural network generalization of this method exists under the name of 
“FermiNet” and has shown promise [11]. Another ML-enriched way to compute quantum 

 
 
potential energy functions is by training neural networks to approximate them on many density 
functional theory quantum electron ground state calculations [12].  
 
Working our way up the scale hierarchy that Feynman liked to describe, a standard method for 
simulating multi-molecular systems in biology, biochemistry, and materials science is using 
Molecular Dynamics (MD) particle-based (non-quantum) stochastic dynamics. Methods for 
speeding up such simulations using machine learning now exist [13]. What is more, methods like 
ANI-1 or FermiNet neural networks are capable of learning potential energy functions that could 
appear in MD simulations, creating a truly multiscale model stack, which Feynman thought was 
important as “this tremendous world of interconnecting hierarchies” but worried that the inter-
level connections were actually “… a little weak. We have not thought them all through yet.” 
[10]. But now perhaps we can think them through, aided by artificial intelligence. 
 
A considerably further jump up the scale hierarchy leads theorists to spatial continuum models 
modeled as partial differential equations, for example for fluid flow or elastic mechanics. The 
solution of these and many other PDEs can now be vastly accelerated, and indeed the PDEs can 
themselves be learned from data, using a variety of different neural network and related machine 
learning methods [14]. Related work in multiscale model reduction using ML, about which I am 
reasonably hopeful, includes my own collaborative efforts that use a dynamical version of the 
Boltzmann Machine learning algorithm on additive fundamental process operators [15], and/or 
graph neural networks, for that purpose. Other examples of ML for computational science are 
included in the review [16]. 
 
Of course, science is grounded in experiment and observation that produce data, all aspects of 
which are also being revolutionized by machine learning [17], and codified in deep theoretical 
structures which may yet be impacted as well [18]. But I think the current flowering of AI/ML 
for multiscale, “hierarchical” computational science would have had a strong appeal and 
resonance for Richard Feynman and might have attracted his unique efforts. 
 
 
6. A Mathematical Synthesis, and Return to Symbolic AI? 
 
Could the pendulum ever swing back from numeric AI towards symbolic AI? One motivation for 
that possibility is the widely cited need for “explainable” versions of ML models. Another is to 
remember that the actual mathematical specification of most ML methods is most clearly and 
concisely done by (symbolic) equations. Such ML equations can be derived from statistical 
models and automatically differentiated and parameter-optimized, although it is now possible to 
automatically differentiate and optimize some generic computer programs as well. So the 
pendulum could swing back, at least if it takes a mathematical trajectory and fully absorbs 
current ML methods. In that connection, there are presently two main strands of symbolic 
computing centered on mathematics. 
 
Minsky’s former doctoral student Joel Moses led the 1970’s charge at MIT into computer 
algebra in the form of the Macsyma program which was capable in integral calculus, power 
series manipulation, solution of differential equations, and many other useful applied 
mathematical methods. Computer algebra (CA) systems propagated modestly and comprised a 

 
 
continuously successful niche for symbolic computing with an “AI” flavor; they did not suffer an 
AI winter. At a slower burn that achieved academic but not commercial success, automatic 
theorem proving (ATP) systems kept improving over the intervening decades as well - for 
example there was an entire Journal of Formalized Mathematics, which automatically verified all 
submitted papers. More recently a number of substantial results in mathematics such as the 
Kepler sphere-packing conjecture [19] have been proved using a new generation of Interactive 
Theorem Verification (ITV) systems with powerful inference engines such as “hammers” that 
use automated theorem proving to suggest verifiable proof steps in ITV, and scalable 
!satisfiability modulo theories” logical solver algorithms. So in the realm of mathematics, 
symbolic AI is alive and well on a very modest scale. Could symbolic AI break out from this 
small but critical niche (CA and/or ITV for automating mathematics), into scientific computing 
(which tends to be mathematical) or into general computing? 
 
The only viable strategy for competing with ML methods at this point is to co-opt them. 
Fortunately, the way is clear to combining ML with both CA and ITV as shown by some recent 
papers that may soon be superseded by even stronger results. In the realm of computer algebra 
for symbolic integration and differential-equation solving, there is good progress in approaching 
these problems by means of deep neural networks [20], although more remains to be done [21]. 
ML has been applied to improving the ATP inference engines in ITV [22, 23, 24, 25, 26] based 
on deep reinforcement learning, GPT-2, graph neural networks, and k-nearest neighbors 
respectively, as well as on co-training on multiple related tasks. Conversely, ITV can be used to 
verify ML theory (e.g. [27]) and potentially to improve the reliable generation of ML code.  
 
Of course, better proof alone is not enough. Feynman was a mathematical innovator, but in 
several lectures he expressed the physicists’ sentiment that “It’s possible to know more than you 
can prove”. Another symbolic method is “symbolic regression”, including an interesting 
experiment in rediscovering physics formulae appearing in Feynman’s milestone lectures on 
physics [18]. My own as-yet informal proposal for deep symbolic/ML integration in 
computational science is outlined at the end of [28]. Together with ML in CA and ITV, these 
various recent works point to the possibility of powerful synergistic combinations of symbolic 
and numerical approaches to mathematical AI, perhaps first in applied-mathematical domains 
such as computational science, but eventually in general computing as well. 
 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
In summary, many of Richard Feynman’s ideas about the future of neural network-like machine 
learning systems have come to pass. Since these systems work well now, he would probably 
have devoted time and energy to finding the next deep conceptual breakthrough they enable - 
particularly in the sciences. 
 
 
References 
 
[1] Feynman, R.P. Statistical Mechanics; Reading MA: Benjamin, TX, USA, 1972.  
https://hdl.handle.net/2027/uc1.b4227910 

 
 
 
[2] J J Hopfield, “Neurons with graded response have collective computational properties like 
those of two-state neurons”. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, May 1, 81 (10) 3088-3092, 1984. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.81.10.3088 . 
 
[3] Carsten Peterson and Bo Söderberg. A New Method for Mapping Optimization Problems 
Onto Neural Networks. International Journal of Neural Systems 1(01):3-22, January 1989 DOI: 
10.1142/S0129065789000414 . 
 
[4] Anand Rangarajan, Steven Gold, and Eric Mjolsness, “A novel optimizing neural network 
architecture with applications”. Neural Computation 8(5), 1996. 
 
[5] J J Hopfield, “Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational 
abilities”. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, April 1, 1982 79 (8) 2554-2558; 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554 
 
[6] David H. Ackley, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Terrence J. Sejnowski, “A learning algorithm for 
Boltzmann machines”. Cognitive Science, Volume 9, Issue 1, Pages 147-169, January-March 
1985. 
 
[7] Krizhevsky, Alex; Sutskever, Ilya; Hinton, Geoffrey E.. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems (NIPS 2012). 
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-
networks.pdf 
 
[8] Silver, David; Huang, Aja; Maddison, Chris J.; Guez, Arthur; Sifre, Laurent; Driessche, 
George van den; Schrittwieser, Julian; Antonoglou, Ioannis; Panneershelvam, Veda; Lanctot, 
Marc; Dieleman, Sander; Grewe, Dominik; Nham, John; Kalchbrenner, Nal; Sutskever, Ilya; 
Lillicrap, Timothy; Leach, Madeleine; Kavukcuoglu, Koray; Graepel, Thore; Hassabis, Demis 
(28 January 2016). "Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search". 
Nature. 529 (7587): 484–489. 
 
[9] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever , 
“Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners”. 
https://cdn.openai.com/better-language-
models/language_models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf 
 
[10] R. P. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law. MIT Press 1967; 2017, pp. 121-126. “a 
little weak …”: p. 125; “… this tremendous world …”: p. 126. Transcription of R. P. Feynman, 
Messenger Lecture #5: The Distinction of Past and Future. See Lecture 5, section 9, minutes 39-
48 (or start at min. 33 for more context). As of June 2021 a video recording is available at  
https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/messenger.html , although access could change.  
 
[11] David Pfau, James S. Spencer, Alexander G. D. G. Matthews, and W. M. C. Foulkes, “Ab 
initio solution of the many-electron Schrödinger equation with deep neural networks”. Phys. 
Rev. Research 2, 033429 – 16 September 2020. 

 
 
https://journals.aps.org/prresearch/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429#fulltext 
 
[12] J. S. Smith, O. Isayev, and A. E. Roitberg, !ANI-1: An extensible neural network potential 
with DFT accuracy at force field computational cost,” Chemical Science, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 3192–
3203, 2017. 
 
[13] Weile Jia, Han Wang, Mohan Chen, Denghui Lu, Lin Lin, Roberto Car, Weinan E, Linfeng 
Zhang, “Pushing the limit of molecular dynamics with ab initio accuracy to 100 million atoms 
with machine learning”. Supercomputing ’20, 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3433701.3433707 ,  https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00223. 
 
[14] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G.E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A deep 
learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial 
differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, Volume 378, pp. 686-707, 1 February 
2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. 
 
[15] !Learning Dynamic Boltzmann Distributions as Reduced Models of Spatial Chemical Kinetics”, 
Oliver K. Ernst, Tom Bartol, Terrence Sejnowski, and Eric Mjolsness. Journal of Chemical Physics 
149, 034107, July 2018. Also arXiv 1803.01063, March 2018 
 
[16] Giuseppe Carleo  Ignacio Cirac, Kyle Cranmer, Laurent Daudet, Maria Schuld, Naftali Tishby 
Leslie Vogt-Maranto, Lenka Zdeborová, !Machine learning and the physical sciences”. Rev. Mod. 
Phys, v 91, Oct-Dec 2019. 
 
[17] “Machine Learning for Science: State of the Art and Future Prospects”. Science  14 Sept 
2001: Vol. 293, Issue 5537, pp. 2051-2055 
DOI: 10.1126/science.293.5537.2051 
 
[18] Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark, !AI Feynman: a Physics-Inspired Method for Symbolic 
Regression”. Science Advances, vol. 6 no. 16,  April 15, 2020. DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aay2631. 
 
[19] Thomas Hales, Mark Adams, Gertrud Bauer, Tat Dat Dang, John Harrison, Hoang Le Truong, 
Cezary Kaliszyk, Victor Magron, Sean McLaughlin, Tat Thang Nguyen, Quang Truong Nguyen, Tobias 
Nipkow, Steven Obua, Joseph Pleso, Jason Rute, Alexey Solovyev, Thi Hoai An Ta, Nam Trung Tran, 
Thi Diep Trieu, Josef Urban, Ky Vu, Roland Zumkeller, “A formal proof of the Kepler conjecture”. 
Forum of Mathematics, Pi (2017), Vol. 5, e2. doi:10.1017/fmp.2017.1 . 
 
[20] Guillaume Lample, François Charton, !Deep Learning for Symbolic Mathematics” 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01412  
 
[21] Ernest Davis,!"The Use of Deep Learning for Symbolic Integration: A Review of (Lample and 
Charton, 2019)”. https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.05752 .  
 
[22] Automated Theorem Proving in Intuitionistic Propositional Logic by Deep Reinforcement 
Learning, Mitsuru Kusumoto, Keisuke Yahata, Masahiro Sakai, https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.00796 
 

 
 
[23] HOList: An Environment for Machine Learning of Higher-Order Theorem Proving, Kshitij 
Bansal, Sarah M. Loos, Markus N. Rabe, Christian Szegedy, Stewart Wilcox, 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.03241 
 
[24] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever, !Generative Language Modeling for Automated Theorem 
Proving”, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.03393.pdf 
 
[25] Jan Jakubův, Karel Chvalovský, Miroslav Olšák, Bartosz Piotrowski, Martin Suda, Josef Urban, 
“ENIGMA Anonymous: Symbol-Independent Inference Guiding Machine (system description)” 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05406 
 
[26] Gauthier, T., Kaliszyk, C., Urban, J. et al. TacticToe: Learning to Prove with Tactics. J Autom 
Reasoning 65, 257–286 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-020-09580-x 
 
[27] Bentkamp, A., Blanchette, J.C. & Klakow, D. A Formal Proof of the Expressiveness of Deep 
Learning. J Autom Reasoning 63, 347–368 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-018-9481-5 
 
[28] Eric Mjolsness, “Prospects for Declarative Mathematical Modeling of Complex Biological Systems”. 
Bulletin 
of 
Mathematical 
Biology, 
Volume 
81, 
Issue 8, 
pp 
3385–3420, 
August 
2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-019-00628-7. 
 
