Feynman 1947 letter on path integral for the Dirac equation
Ted Jacobson
Maryland Center for Fundamental Physics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
Abstract
In 1947, four months before the famous Shelter Island conference, Richard Feynman wrote a
lengthy letter to his former MIT classmate Theodore Welton, reporting on his efforts to develop
a path integral describing the propagation of a Dirac particle. While these efforts never came to
fruition, and were shortly abandoned in favor of a very different method of dealing with the electron
propagator appearing in in QED, the letter is interesting both from the historical viewpoint of re-
vealing what Feynman was thinking about during that period just before the development of QED,
and for its scientific ideas. It also contains at the end some philosophical remarks, which Feynman
wraps up with the comment, вҖңWell enough for the baloney.вҖқ In this article, I present a transcription
of the letter along with editorial notes, and a facsimile of the original handwritten document. I also
briefly comment on FeynmanвҖҷs efforts and discuss their relation to some later work.
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
The letter
3
3
Note on strategy for separating the effect of the mass
11
4
Commentary and relation to later work
11
A Supplementary material: facsimiles
15
1
Introduction
The motivating germ of FeynmanвҖҷs diagrammatic formulation of QED was the idea that if the electro-
magnetic field is eliminated in favor of direct inter-particle interaction, then it is possibleвҖ”classicallyвҖ”
to exclude the problematic self-interactions that lead to divergent self-energy [1, 2]. Wheeler and Feyn-
man [3, 4] developed a classical realization of this approach to electrodynamics using a relativistic
worldline action principle with pairwise interactions.1 To implement this idea in the quantum theory, it
1What was novel in their work was not the action principle, but the recognition that if the universe is a perfect absorber
of radiation then the physics of the time symmetric action principle would manifest as if one restricted to purely retarded (or
purely advanced) electromagnetic fields, which could account for radiation reaction.
1
arXiv:2408.15070v2  [physics.hist-ph]  25 Mar 2025

was necessary to develop a worldline action approach to quantum mechanics, which Feynman did for
nonrelativistic particles in his Ph.D. dissertation [5], and reported in a journal article six years later [6].
A next step in this program would have been to develop a relativistic worldline path integral for spin-1/2
particles, so that in particular electrons and positrons could be included in the theory. Feynman never
published anything along these lines, but we know from comments in his Nobel Prize address [1], and
from a letter he wrote to his former MIT classmate Theodore (Ted) Welton [7], that this was not for
want of trying.
The letter, which consists of thirteen densely handwritten pages, came to light in SchweberвҖҷs RMP
article, Feynman and the Visualization of Spacetime Processes [2], where it was mentioned briefly in
Section IV.C. In The Genesis of Feynman Diagrams by WВЁuthrich [8], it was the subject of extensive dis-
cussion in Sections 4.3-4.5 of Chapter 4, вҖңThe Dirac Equation: FeynmanвҖҷs Great StruggleвҖқ. The focus
there was on the role this effort played on the path to the diagrams, and on FeynmanвҖҷs motivations, his
evaluation of his own attempts, and on his attitude toward visualization and understanding in physics.
These sections include transcriptions of roughly a page and a half of text from the letter, mostly pertain-
ing to this focus, as well as facsimiles of all but four of the pages from the letter. The present article,
in contrast, focuses on parsing and evaluating the technical aspects of FeynmanвҖҷs efforts to construct a
path integral for a Dirac particle in three spatial dimensions.
In view of historical interest in what Feynman was up to just before developing his diagrammatic
approach to QED, as well as the fact that there has been a continuing small but persistent effort by others
to develop a spacetime path integral for spin-1/2 particles (without the use of Grassmann variables), it
seemed worthwhile to transcribe and reproduce the letter in full, to make it more accessible. My own
interest was driven in large part by the fact that I had developed a similar approach to the problem many
years ago [9], inspired by Problem 2-6 in the book by Feynman and Hibbs [10], which lays out how the
propagator for a Dirac particle in 1+1 spacetime dimensions can be obtained from a sum over paths that
zigzag at the speed of light. It is fascinating to see in the letter how Feynman tried (without success as
far as I can tell) to handle the 3+1 dimensional case.
Section 2 of this paper contains a complete transcription of the letter along with editorial footnotes
aimed at clarifying its content. Section 3 contains a transcription of a brief note, probably written by
Feynman, outlining a strategy for separating out the effect of the mass term in constructing a path integral
for the Dirac equation. Section 4 presents commentary on, and evaluation of, FeynmanвҖҷs efforts, as well
as discussion their relation to some later work. Facsimiles of the original handwritten letter and note are
included in Supplementary Material.
There is no finer way to close this introduction than to quote FeynmanвҖҷs own comments on his
efforts in this direction, taken from his Nobel Lecture [1]:
Another problem on which I struggled very hard, was to represent relativistic electrons with
this new quantum mechanics. I wanted to do a unique and different way вҖ“ and not just by
copying the operators of Dirac into some kind of an expression and using some kind of
Dirac algebra instead of ordinary complex numbers. I was very much encouraged by the
fact that in one space dimension, I did find a way of giving an amplitude to every path by
limiting myself to paths, which only went back and forth at the speed of light. The amplitude
was simple (iПө) to a power equal to the number of velocity reversals where I have divided
the time into steps and I am allowed to reverse velocity only at such a time. This gives (as Пө
approaches zero) DiracвҖҷs equation in two dimensions вҖ“ one dimension of space and one of
time (в„Ҹ= m = c = 1).
DiracвҖҷs wave function has four components in four dimensions, but in this case, it has only
two components and this rule for the amplitude of a path automatically generates the need
for two components. Because if this is the formula for the amplitudes of path, it will not
2

do you any good to know the total amplitude of all paths, which come into a given point
to find the amplitude to reach the next point. This is because for the next time, if it came
in from the right, there is no new factor iПө if it goes out to the right, whereas, if it came
in from the left there was a new factor iПө. So, to continue this same information forward
to the next moment, it was not sufficient information to know the total amplitude to arrive,
but you had to know the amplitude to arrive from the right and the amplitude to arrive to
the left, independently. If you did, however, you could then compute both of those again
independently and thus you had to carry two amplitudes to form a differential equation
(first order in time).
And, so I dreamed that if I were clever, I would find a formula for the amplitude of a path
that was beautiful and simple for three dimensions of space and one of time, which would
be equivalent to the Dirac equation, and for which the four components, matrices, and all
those other mathematical funny things would come out as a simple consequence вҖ“ I have
never succeeded in that either. But, I did want to mention some of the unsuccessful things
on which I spent almost as much effort, as on the things that did work.
2
The letter
The letter [7] is filed at the Caltech Archives in Box 11, Folder 2 (Dirac Equation). It responds to a prior
letter from Welton, which is likely the 18 page letter that is in the same Folder (except for the first two
pages which are missing). Many other papers and notes related to the Dirac equation are filed in Box
11, Folder 2, although I found no significant development on a path integral for the 3+1 dimensional
Dirac equation beyond what appears in this letter.
I have transcribed the letter preserving in most cases notation, punctuation, and placement of text,
except when that would have been impractical due to the placement of diagrams, side notes, or annota-
tions on the page. Crossed out text has been omitted, and the equation numbers are added by me in the
transcription for ease of future reference. Anything in square brackets is clarification or commentary by
me, including all of the footnotes. A facsimile of the letter is included in the Supplementary Material.
Monday, Feb. 10.2
Dear Ted
I got your very interesting letter today.
I realized how 2nd quantization in the case of a He atom transformed something that looked like
SchrodingerвҖҷs picture (if ПҲ is a function) to something that was correct (if ПҲ is an operator). So I knew
you are on the right track with your theory & I now believe it to such an extent that I will learn 2nd
quant. & try to solve your problem of how to deal with the вҖңrest of the universe.вҖқ3 I am engaged now
in a general program of study вҖ“ I want to understand (not just in a mathematical way) the ideas in all
branches of theor. physics. As you know I am now struggling with the Dirac Eqn.
The ideas which you outlined were, as you say, vague, but otherwise they are exactly right in the
sense that the way I now see the Dirac Eqn. is just a more precise formulation of your (& of course
my earlier) ideas. There are several ways I can explain it, all leading to the same answer but all not
2[SchweberвҖҷs bibliography in [2] cites 1947 as the year of this letter, and WВЁuthrich [8] points out that February 10 fell on
a Monday only in 1941 and 1947 during the 1940вҖҷs.]
3[WeltonвҖҷs letter is in part concerned with the effort to develop a relativistic quantum field theoretic version of the WheelerвҖ“
Feynman absorber theory of radiation, based on half advanced plus half retarded potentials.]
3

equally precise. The one with the most shaky physical ideas at present, I think is the closest to the truth
& I would like to explain it to you because (1) you may get nice ideas (2) I will learn something by
formulating it clearly. In this particular вҖңmodelвҖқ paths do not necessarily go at light velocity вҖ“ altho I
may change that later as you shall see.
The idea which I got to in 2 dimensions, of loading each turn thru Оё by eiОё/2 does not work well in 3
dimensions for the angles Оё are in different planes. What is needed is to keep track of 3 dimensional rota-
tions, and to use a factor instead of eiОё/2 which is capable of keeping track of a complete 3-dimensional
rotation. To be more precise, one model I had said this: go on any path at light velocity but consider
only paths that start from A & go to B entering B in the same direction as they left A. Then the factor is
eia/2 where a is the solid angle enclosed by the tangent (velocity) vector in its gyrations along the path.
Now we at once ask what information must be kept by the time we reach C. At C the area (solid angle)
enclosed by the vector is not closed so we have simply to keep track, sort of, of where we are on the
sphere. But slightly more than that. When we get back to A (at B)4 we have enclosed area & that is what
we have to keep track of. One geometrical way we can keep track is to put up a small arrowhead at A &
move it parallel to itself as you go along the trajectory (differential parallelism). When it gets to B (IвҖҷm
on the sphere surface now) it will have rotated, relative to its original position by an angle 2ПҖ вҲ’a. Thus
at C we need keep only the axis of C and a direction for our little vector. This we can do by choosing
a standard direction arbitrarily at each pt of the sphere and saying that at C we have to rotate around
C by a given angle to define the angle of the little vector with the standard direction. Thus we have at
the point C in the path to keep track of a rotation in three space (around the axis of the tangent to the
path). Thus the вҖңwave functionвҖқ (defined to be that quantity or quantities which if known at C from all
paths reaching C would permit calculation [of] the same quantities at the next instant of time) must be
a symbol representing a rotation in space вҖ“ which can be added & which, if the rotation is вҖңaвҖқ around
some particular axis (say the z axis) must be represented by eia/2. [Added as a footnote:] I forgot to say,
the whole thing can be put in a very succinct way: any path represents a rotation. For imagine that we
have a sphere with a pole & keep turning it so that the pole-center line lies in the direction of the pathвҖҷs
tangent. Then when we complete the path the sphere has made a net rotation. If the wave function at A
is ПҲA, that at B represents the вҖңrotation of the pathвҖқ Г—ПҲA (summed on all paths). If tangent at A is in
same direction as at B, net rotation can only be rotation around pole-center axis. It is, by angle a.
I donвҖҷt expect you to understand the above argument because it was a long time for me to figure
it out too. However, be that as it may, when I studied quaternions which I knew were designed to
represent rotations I realized that they were the mathematical tool in which to represent my thoughts.
To remind you:5 a quaternion q is a hybrid addition between a scalar Оұ & vector A.6 q = Оұ + A say.7
4[This presumably refers to the directions at A and B.]
5[Here in the right margin Feynman adds the properties of the basis quaternions: i = rot by 180в—Ұabout x, j = rot by 180в—Ұ
about y, k = rot by 180в—Ұabout z, as well as the multiplication rules, i2 = вҲ’1, j2 = вҲ’1, k2 = вҲ’1, ij = k = вҲ’ji etc,
and q = Оұ + Axi + Ayj + Azk. Near the end of the letter (see footnote 22) he mentions the relation to Pauli matrices (e.g.
i = вҲ’iПғz), referring to a notation that Welton had used.]
6[Feynman writes a vector as well as the corresponding quaternion as a letter with a double line on the left. In this transcript
instead boldface notation is employed.]
7[For modern readers, it may be easier to follow the reasoning by identifying q = Оұ + A with the 2 Г— 2 complex matrix
4

If q = Оұ + A , p = ОІ + B then qp = ОұОІ вҲ’A В· B + ОұB + ОІA + A Г— B. q + p = Оұ + ОІ + A + B.
Symbol ВҜq is defined (say adjoint quaternion вҶҗmy term) ВҜq = Оұ вҲ’A. The size of a quaternion squared
is qВҜq = (Оұ + A)(Оұ вҲ’A) = Оұ2 + A В· A: a scalar. The quaternion representing a rotation about the
axis n (unit vector) by angle Оё is cos Оё/2 + n sin Оё/2 = enОё/2 = qОё,n.8 Such a quaternion has unit
size. If n is a unit vector, then considering it as a quaternion it represents a rotation by 180в—Ұaround n.
nn = вҲ’n В· n + n Г— n = вҲ’1 so rotation by 360в—Ұaround any axis is represented by вҲ’1. 720в—Ұby +1 &
is equivalent to no rotation. If n1 and n2 are two unit vectors, what quaternion is вҲ’n1n2 = n1ВҜn2? It is
the result of 180в—Ұaround n2 followed by -180в—Ұaround n1. This, by an argument due to Wigner which
is clear when you think about it, is a rotation around an axis вҠҘto n1 & n2 by an angle equal to twice
the angle between n1 & n2 (because 180в—Ұaround n1 moves n2 to the other side, thus moves it by twice
the angle between n1 & n2.9
Consider then a path, which may be looked upon as a sequence n1, n2, n3, . . . of unit vectors
(tangent vectors) (velocity vectors) at successive positions of the path. Suppose there are an even number
of them (IвҖҷll do that better later). We seek the quaternion representing the rotation for this path resulting
from turning n1 to n2, from n2 to n3, from n3 to n4 ...etc. This is needed (see footnote above) for
quantum mech. I assert it is simply n1ВҜn2n3ВҜn4 . . . (product of all nвҖҷs).10 ВҜn = вҲ’n. For consider that
n1 & n2 differ only infinitesimally (?). Then n1n2 is a rotation by twice the angle n1 to n2, & then n3
to n4 is a rot. by twice angle 3 вҶ’4. But angle 2 to 3 or 4 to 5 etc are left out, so assuming continuity
(?) etc. the factor of two is undone! (What I say is OK in the limit for a continuous path вҖ“ I donвҖҷt know
what is true for Weierstrass curves with infinite discontinuities in slope or something).
Thus the factor ОҰ = e
i
в„ҸS = e
i
в„Ҹ
R t2
t1 L(x, Лҷx) dt in my non-relativistic quantum mech. must be replaced
by n1ВҜn2n3 . . . ВҜnN, and the wave function is a quaternion.11 Thus one might guess, by reducing the long
product to a final step, not ПҲ(r, t + Пө) =
R
nПҲ(r вҲ’Пөn, t)dn but rather
ПҲ(r, t + Пө) =
Z
nПҮ(r вҲ’Пөn, t)dn
(1)
ПҮ(r, t + Пө) = вҲ’
Z
nПҲ(r вҲ’Пөn, t)dn
(2)
because with an odd no. of n factors one has quite a different thing (called ПҮ) than one has with even
no. The symbol dn means some sort (?)(!) of an average over all directions. The right hand side can be
ОұI вҲ’iA В· Пғ, where Пғ is the vector of Pauli matrices.]
8[With the Pauli matrix interpretation of footnote 7, this is the unitary matrix exp(вҲ’iОёn В· Пғ/2), which is the spin-1/2
representation of a rotation through angle Оёn acting on two-component spinors. Alternatively, the conjugation qОё,nAВҜqОё,n
yields the quaternion corresponding to the rotated vector A.]
9[In the Pauli matrix representation of footnote 7,
n1ВҜn2 вҶҗвҶ’(вҲ’in1 В· Пғ)(in2 В· Пғ) = n1 В· n2 + i(n1 Г— n2) В· Пғ = cos Оё12I + i sin Оё12n12 В· Пғ = exp(iОё12n12 В· Пғ),
where Оё12 is the angle of rotation from Оё1 to Оё2 and n12 is the unit vector in the direction of n1 Г— n2. This seems to differ by
the sign of the rotation from what Feynman says, but it is not entirely clear to me what he meant.]
10[It seems to me that the order of multiplication should be the opposite.]
11[Feynman does not comment on how he would connect a quaternion wave function to the spinor wave function that is
governed by the Dirac equation. Perhaps it was just obvious to him that he would eventually take the quaternion to operate on
an initial two-component spinor, thus yielding another spinor.]
5

simplified, if we assume dn means just average over all directions of the vector n;
Eg :
Z
nПҮ(r вҲ’Пөn, t)dn =
Z
ndn

ПҮ(r, t) вҲ’Пө
Z
n(n В· вҲҮ)dn

ПҮ(r, t) + В· В· В·
(3)
 Now
Z
ndn = 0,
Z
n(n В· A)dn = A В· 1
3

(4)
= 0 вҲ’1
3ПөвҲҮПҮ
(5)
here вҲҮПҮ is a quaternion combination, not just вҲҮof a scalar.12 It is to be figured thus: if ПҮ = Оұ + A,
then
вҲҮПҮ = вҲҮ(Оұ + A) = вҲҮОұ + вҲҮA = (вҲҮОұ) вҲ’(вҲҮВ· A) + (вҲҮГ— A).
(6)
Now, the factor of 3 and a few other things worry me about this but I realize I am close because in
quaternion notation DiracвҖҷs equations (with mass) (no field) can be written:
вҲӮa
вҲӮt = вҲҮb + iВөb
вҲӮb
вҲӮt = вҲ’вҲҮa + iВөa
(7)
so it looks like we are close to the equations with mass Вө = mc
в„Ҹequal to zero.13 Or maybe if we average
just right, or add another effect we could get mass. (Note the imaginary.) To get the fields, multiply
n1ВҜn2n3 . . . by exp ie
в„Ҹc
R
(n В· A)ds14
Now, if you are still staggering but on your feet I will tell you more, which is even harder to un-
derstand. My purpose now is to consider a path as a set of four functions xВө(s) = x, y, z, t(s) of a
parameter s. Thus the speed need not be that of light вҖ” but for simplicity I want to restrict it to veloci-
ties less than that (or at most equal to c). The idea now is to consider a path is a succession of 4-vectors
v(1)
Вө , v(2)
Вө , v(3)
Вө . . . representing successive proper velocities (vВөvВө = 1) on the path. Then each path
represents a net Lorentz-Rotation transformation. (I mean a combination of a Rot. & a Lorentz). Thus
take the Lorentz trans. which carries v(1)
Вө
to v(2)
Вө . Then that which carries v(2)
Вө
to v(3)
Вө
etc. What is the
net? We desire a symbolism, which by analogy works in 4 space (3+1) like the quaternions do in 3. I
shall show that this symbolism is furnished by quaternions using complex numbers for components!
I have trouble visualizing 3+1 space, but I have become an expert at visualizing (really!) 4 dimen-
sions with all dimensions equivalent. ds2 = dx2 +dy2 +dz2 +dt2. What are the properties of rotations
in this space? First a simple rotation called turn from on vector n1 to another n2 is not around just one
axis, but around two, (since there are 2 perpend. directions both вҠҘto n1 & n2). More precisely for any
plane (e.g. of n1 & n2) there is a completely вҠҘplane (I call it the antipodal plane) such that if n1 is any
vector in the first plane, & n2 is any vector in the second plane, then n1 is вҠҘto n2. A plane (& hence
its antipodal plane) is determined by 4 parameters {2 perpendicular unit vectors = 8 - 2 (unit) - 1(perp)
= 5 nos. but they can be set at any angle in the plane вҲҙ4 para.}. A complete 4 dim. rot. is characterized
by 6 parameter & can always be resolved into a turn (1 parameter) in a certain plane (4 para.) and in
addition some other rotational angle (turn) in the antipodal plane (1 para). Turns in two antipodal planes
12[The implication of (5) is that ПҲ(r, t + Пө) in (1) is smaller than ПҮ(r, t) by a factor of O(Пө). This shows that the amplitude
rule proposed in the previous paragraph cannot yield the Dirac propagator, since every step would entail another factor of Пө.
FeynmanвҖҷs comparison with (7) suggests that he may have intended to subtract ПҲ(r, t) from the left hand side of (1), in which
case that side would also be O(Пө). However, the resulting equation would not correspond to his proposed amplitude rule.]
13[I suspect that in the first equation вҲҮb should be вҲҮa, and in the second equation vice versa, presuming that a and b are
supposed to describe opposite chiralities.]
14[Annotations indicate that the integral is вҖңalong pathвҖқ, and the integrand quantity in parentheses is вҖңordinary scalarвҖқ.]
6

commute, obviously. (Example a Lorentz trans. from velocity in z direction is a turn in the zt plane,
this commutes with space rotations about the z axis (turns in the xy plane).).
Now (lets call these octonions15) the вҖңquaternionsвҖқ representing 4 space rotations will probably have
among their fundamental unit vectors, a set of six: Ixy, Iyz, Izx, Ixw, Iyw, Izw such that I2
xy = вҲ’1 etc.
and such relations as are true with one dimension lacking are still true, such as IxyIyz = Izx = вҲ’IyzIxy.
(We can identify Ixy = k, Iyz = i, Izx = j). These fundamental units represent turns of 180в—Ұin the
various planes xy etx. Hypothesis; (I) the octonion representing a rotation of ПҶ in the xy plane is
e
ПҶ
2 Ixy = cos ПҶ
2 + sin ПҶ
2 Ixy.
(8)
Etc. for other planes. (II) If we go ПҶ on xy plane, and Оё on antipodal zw plane the octonion is16
e
ПҶ
2 Ixye
Оё
2 Izw = cos ПҶ
2 cos Оё
2 + sin ПҶ
2 cos Оё
2Ixy + sin Оё
2 cos ПҶ
2 Izw + sin ПҶ
2 sin Оё
2IxyIzw.
(9)
There is no ambiguity about the order of factors since rotations about the antipodal planes commute.
(hence also IxyIzw = IzwIxy).
I have just explained how to define the octonions for a special pair xy & zw but it is clear what to
do for any two antipodal planes (the I for any plane is the appropriate (by coordinate transformation as
tensor 2nd rank) linear combination of the IвҖҷs for xy, xz, etc. - In fact define Iyx = вҲ’Ixy & the IвҖҷs form
& transform like an antisym. tensor 2nd rank).
Now we need one other fact to finish the description. We see we have new вҖңunit vectorsвҖқ or quan-
tities such as IxyIzw. How many of these are there (for other pairs of planes e.g. IxzIyw) & what
are their properties? Well they represent two 180в—Ұturns, one around each of two antipodal planes.
The first turns x to вҲ’x and y to вҲ’y; the second z to вҲ’z and w to вҲ’w. Hence, (III) two 180в—Ұrot.
about antipodal planes, represented hereafter by the symbol R simply reverses direction of all axes and
is the same no matter which pair of antipodal planes is used. Further, clearly R commutes with every
operation. In 4 space R2 = 1 (since R2 = 360в—Ұaround two axes, & each one is вҲ’1. As I find, but donвҖҷt
see, R2 = вҲ’1 in (3+1) dimens. space. Hence
IxyIzw = вҲ’R = IyzIxw
(10)
etc.17 Hence multiplying both sides by Ixy, note:
IxyIxyIzw = вҲ’RIxy = вҲ’Izw.
вҲҙIzw = RIxy
(11)
hence we have 4 unit vectors , i, j, k, R. R commutes with all!
R2 = +1
(4 space)
1
(3+1 space)
i2 = j2 = k2 = вҲ’1.
ij = k = вҲ’ji.
Ri = iR etc.
(12)
Ixy = k
Ixw = Ri
Iyz = i
Iyw = Rj
Izx = j
Ixw = Rk
(13)
15[This is not the standard meaning of the term вҖңoctonionвҖқ. Below, Feynman will conclude that, in Lorentz signature, what
he calls octonions can be identified with quaternions with complex coefficients.]
16[For the last term Feynman wrote sin ПҶ
2 cos ПҶ
2 IxyIzw, but this must have been a slip of the pen, since the expression
should be symmetric under ПҶ вҶ”Оё interchange. Also, obviously if Оё = 0 there should be no term involving Izw.]
17[Pointing to the minus sign in front of R, Feynman inserts вҖңarbitrary choice for convenienceвҖқ.]
7

Every octonion then is of the form,
q = Оұ1 + RОұ2 + A1 + RA2
(14)
where Оұ1 and Оұ2 are nos. and A1, A2 represent 3 vectors, A1 = A1xi + A1yj + A1zk, A2 = A2xi +
A2yj + A2zk. Thus, an octonion is a quaternion whose coefficients are of form a + Rb. In 3+1 space
R2 = вҲ’1 and we can take R = i if we wish, so octonions for Lorentz Trans & Rotations are quaternions
with complex (a + ib) coefficients. QED. The result for 4 space is independent of which axis is used
for w, but in 3+1 space, to preserve the 3+1 symmetry we can take the t axis (in some Lorentz frame)
to be w.
Now, how can we represent the transformation needed to turn vВө into uВө where vВө, uВө are unit four
vectors? (In 4 space, first). Consider the octonion +(P
Вө vВөuВө) вҲ’P
Вө>ОҪ vВөuОҪIВөОҪ.18 I say it represents
a turn in the v, u plane by twice the angle of the turn of vВө to uВө. (Because, the analysis above showed
us we could take any axis, so choose x, y in plane of v, u. z & w perp. Then vВөuВө = cos Оё where Оё is
angle between and P
Вө>ОҪ vВөuОҪIВөОҪ = (vxuy вҲ’uxvy)k = sin Оё k.19 вҲҙq = cos Оё + k sin Оё = eОёk while
the turn vВө to uВө is eОёk/2). Problem is, can we represent it as a product vu of a quaternion depending
on v only by one depending on u only. Yes. Choose any arbitrary axis (say w). Then consider two
quaternions vВө into wВө by twice angle, and wВө into uВө by twice angle. Then vВө into uВө by twice angle
= result of vВө into wВө by twice Г— wВө into uВө by twice. (Proof: Find the axis perpend. to uВө, vВө, wВө.
Consider all rotations that keep this axis fixed. Then we are dealing with just 3-space rotations & can
use WignerвҖҷs idea that vВө into uВө by twice angle = 180в—Ұaround vВө Г— 180в—Ұaround uВө. Hence
vВө вҶ’uВө by 2 angle = vВө вҶ’wВө by 2 angle Г— wВө вҶ’uВө by 2 angle
becomes
180в—Ұon vm Г— вҲ’180в—Ұon um = 180в—Ұon vm Г— вҲ’180в—ҰГ— wm Г— 180в—Ұon wm Г— вҲ’180в—Ұon um
but the two 180в—Ұon wВө cancel out proving the lemma.)
вҲҙ
X
Вө
(vВөuВө) вҲ’
X
Вө>ОҪ
vВөuОҪIВөОҪ = vВө вҶ’uВө at 2 Г— angle = vВҜu
where v = vВө вҶ’wВө at 2 Г— angle = P
Вө(vВөwВө) вҲ’P
Вө>ОҪ vВөwОҪIВөОҪ. u is defined likewise. ВҜu means u
with every i, j, k (but NOT R) reversed in sign. If wВө is chosen for convenience as the 4th axis,
v = v4 вҲ’(v1i + v2j + v3k)R
(A)
where R = i in 3+1 dimensions.
Hence, the Lorentz transformation defined by a path is
v(1)ВҜv(2)v(3)ВҜv(4) . . .
where v(i)
Вө
is the ith velocity (proper velocity) vector in succession and v(i) is the quaternion v(i)
4
вҲ’
i(v(i)
1 i + v(i)
2 j + v(i)
3 k). (A)
18[Feynman probably meant to write the contravariant form vВө, but at many points he does not seem to be concerned with
index placement.]
19[Feynman indicated above k that it is equal to Ixy. (Also, he mistakenly wrote uyvx for the second term.)]
8

Hence the wave equations resulting from the obvious analogy from 3 dim. case are (s is a parameter
on wave function, RВө means four vector position, time).20
ПҲ(RВө, s + Пө) =
Z
vПҮ(RВө + ПөvВө, s)dvВө.
ПҮ(RВө, s + Пө) =
Z
ВҜvПҲ(RВө + ПөvВө, s)dvВө.
(B)
Here dvВөis an integral in an invariant way over all directions (in forward light cone) equally weighted.
Assume ПҲ, ПҮ independent of s, or varying exponentially with s and you obtain DiracвҖҷs eqn. with mass
by inserting appropriate constants (for fields add factor ei P
Вө
R
vВөAВөds whose significance I am now pur-
suing). Or again do not assume vВө is of unit length but write
R
vПҮ(RВө+vВө; s)F(P vВөvВө)dv1dv2dv3dv4
where F is an arbitrary function. Mass is determined by the eigenvalue (values?) of F. Or again, take
most simply for F,21 iОҙвҖІ(vВөvВө). That is,
ПҲ(RВө) = ic
Z
(R вҲ’RвҖІ)ПҮ(RвҖІ
Вө)dR1dR2dR3dR4 ОҙвҖІ (RВө вҲ’RвҖІ
Вө)2
(C)
where R is a quaternion R4 вҲ’i(R1i + R2j + R3k) and choose c appropriately. This goes back to the
light cone idea and everything is back, but I point out the 4 dimens. view because it lends (?) more
complete understanding. With this choice for F, you see we get exactly your equations because22
(RВө вҲ’RвҖІ
Вө)ОҙвҖІ (R вҲ’RвҖІ)2
вүЎ
вҲӮ
вҲӮxВө
Оҙ
 (R вҲ’RвҖІ)2
(15)
вҲҙ(R вҲ’RвҖІ)ОҙвҖІ вүЎ
n вҲӮ
вҲӮt вҲ’i

i вҲӮ
вҲӮx + j вҲӮ
вҲӮy + k вҲӮ
вҲӮz
o
Оҙ
 (R вҲ’RвҖІ)2)

(16)
So
ic
Z
(R вҲ’RвҖІ) ПҮ(RвҖІ
Вө) ОҙвҖІ dR = ic
Z  вҲӮ
вҲӮt вҲ’iвҲҮ

Оҙ ПҮ dR
= ic
 вҲӮ
вҲӮt вҲ’iвҲҮ

(в–Ў2ПҮ)
= ic k2 вҲӮ
вҲӮt вҲ’iвҲҮ

ПҮ
= ПҲ .
(17)
Now I would like to add a little hooey. The reason I am so slow is not that I do not know what
the correct equations, in integral or differential form are (Dirac tells me) but rather that I would like to
understand these equations from a many points of view as possible. So I do it in 1,2,3,& 4 dimensions
with different assumptions etc. It is just that vagueness which you mention which I would like to try to
clear up. I was especially impressed by your intuition in guessing just what the ПҲвҖҷs would mean (I mean
the odd & even deflections, etc.). I hope you get something out of my point of view. I am attempting
this to see how to alter things in a natural way. (Eg. should the Оҙ function be exactly a Оҙ function?) What
is interaction between particles? For fields it is easy to define as eivВ·A factor, which is sensible if the v is
infinitesimal per step вҖ“ and in the integrals on the left of (B) and (C) ought to extend over short distances
20[Feynman indicated вҖңQuat. (see eqn (A))вҖқ above v in the first integrand.]
21[Pointing to the prefactor i, Feynman writes вҖңMeaning what?вҖқ]
22[Pointing to (R вҲ’RвҖІ) after вҲҙFeynman writes вҖңquatвҖқ, and after that equation he adds parenthetically вҖң(Needless to say,
what you call Пғx I call ii; Пғy = ij, Пғz = ik.)вҖқ]
9

so eivВ·A is OK, but right along light cones the distances get long вҖ“ finite in fact, but usually one gets
no contribution from large distances because usually the ПҲ or ПҮ function oscillates rapidly, but I want
to investigate this more thoroughly. It is very interesting that if you integrate e
в„Ҹc
R
AВөdxВө along a long
finite section of straight light ray the biggest contributions come from electrons exactly in the direction
of the ray and the result is then simply e2
в„Ҹc ln(r1/r2), where r1 and r2 are the distances (or times) of the
end pts of integration away from the electron producing the field.23 Can all electrodynamics be stated
by this simple logarithm rule?
I find physics is a wonderful subject. We know so very much and then subsume it into so very few
equations that we can say we know very little (except these equations - Eg. Dirac, Maxwell, Schrod).
Then we think we have the physical picture with which to interpret the equations. But there are so
very few equations that I have found that many physical pictures can give the same equations. So I am
spending my time in study вҖ“ in seeing how may new viewpoints I can take of what is known.
Of course, the hope is that a slight modification of one of the pictures will straighten out some of
the present troubles.
I dislike all this talk of there not being a picture possible, but we only need know how to go about
calculating any phenomena. True we only need calculate. But a picture is certainly a convenience & one
is not doing anything wrong in making one up. It may prove to be entirely haywire while the equations
are nearly right вҖ“ yet for a while it helps. The power of mathematics is terrifying вҖ“ and too many
physicists finding they have the correct equations without understanding them have been so terrified
they give up trying to understand them. I want to go back & try to understand them. What do I mean by
understanding? Nothing deep or accurate вҖ” just to be able to see some of the qualitative consequences
of the equations by some method other than solving them in detail.
For example, IвҖҷm beginning to get a mild вҖңunderstandingвҖқ of the place of DiracвҖҷs Оұ matrices which
were invented by him вҖңto produce an equation of first order in the differential coefficient in the timeвҖқ,
but by me in order вҖңto keep track of the result of a succession of changes of coordinate systemвҖқ. Still
my stuff sounds mathematical вҖ“ & insofar as it is, I still donвҖҷt understand it вҖ” but I will try soon to
reformulate in terms of seeing how things look to someone riding with the electron. (For instance when
an electron appears to go completely around a proton, the proton does not appear from the point of
view of the electron to complete its circuit around the electron! (See Thomson24 on spin orbit interac-
tion.) Because the succession of Lorentz transformations come out at the end as a small rotation of the
electronвҖҷs axes).
Why should the fundamental laws of Nature be so that one cannot explain them to a high-school
student вҖ“ but only to a quite advanced graduate student in physics? And we claim they are simple! In
what sense are they simple? Because we can write them in one line. But it takes 8 years of college
education to understand the symbols. Is there any simple ideas in the laws?
Well enough for the baloney. IвҖҷll get back to work on understanding better my new Dirac Equ. (By
the way I did all this before I got your letter, except to notice that the choice leading from (B) to (C)
gave the Dirac Eqn. in a particularly direct way вҖ” but I did notice that any function F(vВөvВө) gives
Dirac equations if correctly normalized. I was engaged in studying this: Certainly
Z
v ПҮ(RВө вҲ’vВө) dv F(vВөvВө) =
Z
v

vВө
вҲӮ
вҲӮxВө
ПҮ

dv F(vВөvВө) =
n вҲӮ
вҲӮt вҲ’вҲҮ

ПҮ
o Z
vВөvВө F(vВөvВө) dv
|
{z
}
a number
(18)
so DiracвҖҷs Eqn. comes out. But if vВөvВө is nearly zero (assuming F(s2) is small unless s2 is small) it
23[Feynman seems to have assumed here that the ray and the inertial charge wordline lie in a common plane, and he has
chosen Coulomb gauge for the vector potential (the integral in question is not gauge invariant).]
24[Feynman probably intended to refer to Thomas (precession) here.]
10

might still be true that vВө is not small enough to allow replacement in ПҮ(RВө вҲ’vВө) of ПҮ by its first order
Taylor expansion ПҮ(R) + vВө
вҲӮ
вҲӮxВө ПҮ.
Thanx for your suggestions and I look forward to hearing anything else you might think about this.
If you donвҖҷt want to read this letter over & over could you send it back so if someone else wants an
explanation they can read it.
I will work on your 2nd quantization, when I get time. I really believe it is correct вҖ“ but is another
example of the terrifying power of math. to make us say things which we donвҖҷt understand but are true.
Sincerely
Dick .
3
Note on strategy for separating the effect of the mass
This section contains a transcription of a note, filed in Box 11, Folder 2, in which the author, who is
probably Feynman, sets out a strategy for separating out the effects of the mass term in seeking a path
integral for the Dirac equation. My guess is that the note was written after the letter to Welton, since the
strategy did not seem to be clear to Feynman in the letter. A facsimile of the original note is included in
the Supplementary Material.
1. If a rule of track will work then if it will apply for very small time intervals Пө then the mass term
in the Dirac Equ. can be neglected (Пө вүӘв„Ҹ/mc). Hence look at neutrino.
2. Field effects are also small.
3. The is no length scale for (free) neutrino case.
4. Hence either free neutrino rule is exact.
5. Or it is not readily reduced to infinitesimal Пө.
Hence either find exact neutrino rule (Huygens Princ.) or expect a rule that shows up correctly only
after an unlimited number of steps!
Thus all you need is a rule that works OK when ПҲ is nearly constant вҖ“ i.e.: small gradients!
4
Commentary and relation to later work
вҖў First of all, it is important to emphasize that the letter is an informal, private communication with
a friend, describing work in progress, so should not be held to the standards one expects of a
publication or even of an informal report on established results.
вҖў Feynman was strongly motivated to вҖңunderstandвҖқ the Dirac equation from an elementary view-
point that could be guessed from simple principles, as he says both in the letter and in his Nobel
Lecture quoted in the Introduction. Rather than just working backward from a finite-differenced
Dirac or Weyl equation, which would have been easier, Feynman aimed to infer the path inte-
gral on purely geometric and algebraic grounds, using the fact that the spin is correlated with
11

the displacement of the particle, together with relations between rotations and quaternions. It
appears that his motivation for that came in part from the case in two spatial dimensions, which
he mentions in the letter. The notes in the archives contain some analysis of the two dimensional
case.
вҖў The role that FeynmanвҖҷs unsuccessful attempts at a path integral for the Dirac particle played
in his progress toward the fantastically successful perturbative diagrammatic method for QED is
explored in depth in Ref. [8]. There are at least two facets to this role. One is the mere fact that, in
formulating quantum mechanics in terms of a path integral, Feynman was led to draw spacetime
diagrams associated to complex numbers that are summed to obtain the full quantum transition
amplitude. This carries over directly into Feynman diagrams. Another facet is that, lacking a path
integral for the free Dirac particle transition amplitude, Feynman shifted attention to the object
that this path integral should have yielded, namely, the propagator, which ends up attached to a
diagram line that replaces the role of a spacetime path. His experience associating quaternions
to path steps would have made the introduction of the Dirac-matrix-valued propagator a natural
construction.
вҖў FeynmanвҖҷs intuitive, heuristic methods that failed for the Dirac path integral were nevertheless
effective in navigating his way from the classical Wheeler-Feynman formulation of electrody-
namics and the Dirac equation to his diagrammatic, perturbative formulation of quantum field
theory. Illuminating accounts and analyses of FeynmanвҖҷs development of these ideas can be
found in Refs. [1, 2, 8], as well as in more recent articles by Blum [11] and by Darrigol [12].
вҖў FeynmanвҖҷs description of the path amplitude defined in terms of the solid angle on the sphere of
tangent directions is not entirely clear to me, but it seems to be very close to PolyakovвҖҷs spin factor
[13]. Some problematic aspects of PolyakovвҖҷs proposal are pointed out and corrected in [14], by
working backwards from the retarded propagator for a (massless) Weyl spinor, expressing it as a
path integral over a sequence of steps defined by spinors. The result appears to agree with what
Feynman seems to be saying, at least concerning the phase associated with a path. FeynmanвҖҷs
вҖңsmall arrowheadвҖқ sounds like the вҖңflagвҖқ of PenroseвҖҷs вҖңflagpole plus flagвҖқ representation of a two
component spinor (up to a sign) [15]. The wave function at a point would thus correspond, apart
from the sign ambiguity, to a such a spinor, as in [14]. However, in [14] it is argued that a more
careful consideration of the continuum limit indicates that the correct step speed is not the speed
of light (as both Feynman and Polyakov said) but rather three times that. That the discrete step
speed should exceed the speed of light is consistent with the CourantвҖ“FriedrichsвҖ“Lewy step speed
convergence condition, which is required for a finite differenced hyperbolic equation to converge
to the continuum equation.
вҖў Although, as noted in footnote 12, FeynmanвҖҷs quaternion chain guess for the spin-1/2 path integral
is not correct as it stands, it is quite close to the approach taken in [9] which does work. The
method in [9] is to first derive a path integral for the chiral (massless) case, and then to describe
a Dirac particle of mass m by a pair of spinors of opposite chirality, which at each step of time
duration Пө have an amplitude iПөm to flip chirality. To derive the chiral path integral, the partial
derivatives in the Weyl equation are replaced by finite differences, and the value of the two-
component spinor wave function ПҲ(x, t + Пө) is expressed in terms of the values of ПҲ(xвҖІ, t) at
the points xвҖІ on a sphere of radius 3Пө (as it turns out) surrounding x. The amplitude for the
step from xвҖІ to x is obtained by multiplying the spinor ПҲ(xвҖІ, t) by the spin projection operator
1
2(I Вұ n В· Пғ) = |Вұnвҹ©вҹЁВұn|, where the Вұ sign corresponds to the fixed chirality of the Weyl
particle, n is the unit vector pointing from xвҖІ to x, and |Вұnвҹ©is the eigenspinor of positive spin in
12

the Вұn direction (n В· Пғ|Вұnвҹ©= Вұ|Вұnвҹ©). The spin projection operator is very close to FeynmanвҖҷs
quaternion path step, but he was missing the scalar part (1
2I) of the quaternion that corresponds to
the spin projection operator. Iteration of this one-step amplitude evolution yields a path integral in
which a path is determined by a sequence of unit vectors ni, and the path amplitude is the product
of the corresponding spin projection operators. The result is a path integral for the retarded
propagator of a spinor wave function in which the steps move at 3 times the speed of light, and
which converges to the continuum propagator.
вҖў The second approach Feynman sketches uses complex quaternions (which are also known as
biquaternions, whose algebra is equivalent to that of the complex 2 Г— 2 matrices). The aim
is a Lorentz covariant formulation, involving path steps that are 4-vectors. After developing
some relations between the algebra of biquaternions and four-dimensional rotations or Lorentz
transformations, he describes the proposed amplitude for a path, and then writes down a one-step
evolution rule in Eqn. (B). A number of aspects look problematic. I may have misunderstood;
but, for what itвҖҷs worth, my critiques are the following:
вҖ“ The argument of the wave function ПҲ(RВө, s) is the four spacetime coordinates RВө and a
path parameter s. The usual Dirac wave function is a function on spacetime, and the role of
s is unexplained.
вҖ“ The integral is over a Lorentz-invariant measure on the unit future timelike 4-vectors. Since
a unit timelike vector can be arbitrarily вҖңlongвҖқ, the proposed amplitude evolution rule is
highly nonlocal in spacetime.
вҖ“ It is not clear why the step vectors are chosen future pointing rather than past pointing.
вҖ“ The unit future timelike 4-vectors form a noncompact hyperbolic space, with infinite vol-
ume, so the integral in (B) is generally not convergent.
вҖ“ Feynman goes on to consider other measures for the integral, one of which is the derivative
of a delta function of vВөvВө. With this measure he sees an indication of the Dirac equation
emerging in (17), however I have been unable to follow the equality in the second line. (In
the final line he seems to assume that ПҮ has the form of a plane wave with squared wave
4-vector k2, and has dropped a minus sign.)
вҖ“ The first equality of (18) seems to be missing a contribution from the zeroth order term in
the Taylor expansion of ПҮ. Such a term was not present in the prior construction with quater-
nions, but in (18) the biquaternion v contains a scalar piece v0I which does not integrate to
zero.
вҖ“ As Feynman recognizes below (18), the truncation of the Taylor expansion is not justified
even when vВө is null or nearly null, because the components of such vВө can nevertheless be
вҖңlargeвҖқ (in some fixed coordinate system).
вҖ“ The second equality of (18) relies on the fact that the integral of vВөvОҪ with respect to a
Lorentz-invariant measure is proportional to the (inverse) Minkowski metric О·ВөОҪ. While
this tensor structure is formally correct, for any choice of the weight F(vВөvВө) other than
zero the integral is not convergent.
вҖў A brief review of work on path integrals for particles with spin in the framework of discrete time
quantum walks, beginning with FeynmanвҖҷs checkerboard [10], can be found in section i.3.1 of
[16].
13

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to the Feynman Estate for permission to reproduce the letter, for which it holds the copy-
right. This work was supported in part by NSF grant PHY-2309634 and by Perimeter Institute where
part of this work was carried out. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported in part by the Govern-
ment of Canada through the Department of Innovation, Science and Economic Development and by the
Province of Ontario through the Ministry of Colleges and Universities.
References
[1] Richard P. Feynman.
The development of the space-time view of quantum electrodynam-
ics. http://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1965/feynman/lecture/,
1965. Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024. Thu. 15 Aug 2024. В© The
Nobel Foundation 1965. Published with permission.
[2] S. S. Schweber. Feynman and the Visualization of Space-time Processes. Rev. Mod. Phys., 58:449вҖ“
508, 1986.
[3] John Archibald Wheeler and Richard Phillips Feynman. Interaction with the absorber as the mech-
anism of radiation. Rev. Mod. Phys., 17:157вҖ“181, 1945.
[4] John Archibald Wheeler and Richard Phillips Feynman. Classical electrodynamics in terms of
direct interparticle action. Rev. Mod. Phys., 21:425вҖ“433, 1949.
[5] Richard Phillips Feynman.
The principle of least action in quantum mechanics.
PhD thesis,
Princeton U., 1942.
[6] R. P. Feynman. Space-time approach to nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
20:367вҖ“387, 1948.
[7] R. P. Feynman. Letter to T. A. Welton, 10 February, 1947. California Institute of Technology
Archives, Box 11, Folder 2.
[8] A. WВЁuthrich. The Genesis of Feynman Diagrams. Archimedes. Springer Netherlands, 2010.
[9] Theodore Jacobson. Spinor Chain Path Integral for the Dirac Electron. J. Phys. A, 17:2433, 1984.
[10] R.P. Feynman, A.R. Hibbs, and D.F. Styer. Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals. Dover Books
on Physics. Dover Publications, 2010.
[11] Alexander S. Blum. The state is not abolished, it withers away: How quantum field theory became
a theory of scattering. Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. B, 60:46вҖ“80, 2017.
[12] Olivier Darrigol. The magic of FeynmanвҖҷs QED: from field-less electrodynamics to the Feynman
diagrams. Eur. Phys. J. H, 44(4-5):349вҖ“369, 2019.
[13] Alexander M. Polyakov. Fermi-Bose Transmutations Induced by Gauge Fields. Mod. Phys. Lett.
A, 3:325, 1988.
[14] Ted Jacobson. Bosonic Path Integral for Spin 1/2 Particles. Phys. Lett. B, 216:150вҖ“154, 1989.
[15] Roger Penrose and Wolfgang Rindler. Spinors and Space-Time. Cambridge Monographs on Math-
ematical Physics. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 4 2011.
14

[16] Pablo Arnault. Discrete-time quantum walks and gauge theories, arXiv:1710.11123. PhD thesis,
UPMC, Paris (main), 2017.
A
Supplementary material: facsimiles
15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29
