arXiv:2405.03366v1  [quant-ph]  6 May 2024
Feynman’s “Simulating Physics with Computers”
Paul M. Alsing1, Carlo Cafaro1,2, Stefano Mancini3,4
1University at Albany-SUNY, Albany, NY 12222, USA
2SUNY Polytechnic Institute, Utica, NY 13502, USA
3University of Camerino, I-62032 Camerino, Italy and
4INFN, Sezione di Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy
This invited essay belongs to a series considering highly inﬂuential articles published by the
International Journal of Theoretical Physics.
In this paper, we highlight the physical content and the profound consequences of Richard Feyn-
man’s 1982 paper on “Simulating Physics with Computers”.
PACS numbers: Quantum Computation (03.67.Lx), Quantum Information (03.67.Ac).
Feynman delivered his seminal lecture “Simulating physics with computers” at the Physics of Computation Confer-
ence at the MIT Endicott House in May of 1981. The content of his lecture was later published by the International
Journal of Theoretical Physics in 1982 [1]. Nowadays, Feynman’s 1982 paper is properly regarded as one of the most
inﬂuential pieces of work that helped laying out the foundations of quantum computing as a research discipline in its
own right.
In Ref. [1], Feynman starts from the observation that natural phenomena are quantum rather than classical in their
essence. Therefore, he focuses on the simulation of quantum systems. He employs counting arguments to preliminarily
deduce that probabilistic simulations of quantum systems by means of classical digital computers with local connections
are not eﬃcient since they use resources that do not scale well with the size of the system. He then further supports
his deduction by focusing on the quantum mechanics of a two-photon correlation experiment. This experiment can
be described as follows. Consider a source (an atom, for instance) that emits two maximally entangled photons in
opposite directions (one going to the right and the other to the left, for instance) toward detector-1 and detector-2
[1, 2]. An analyzer is placed before each detector so that a photon polarized along the x-axis (horizontal polarization)
goes through detector-1, while a photon polarized along the y-axis (vertical polarization) is blocked. Analogously, a
photon polarized along the y-axis goes through detector-2, while a photon polarized along the x-direction is blocked.
Each analyzer is assumed to be rotated independently of the other. For example, when the transmission axis of
analyzer-1 is rotated by the angle φ1 ≥0, analyzer-2 is set to φ2 ≥0. Choosing φ2 −φ1 = 30o, Feynman states that
quantum mechanical predictions agree with experimental results. Speciﬁcally, the probability of agreement between
the two detector outputs (i.e., both collect a photon or neither does) calculated with standard quantum mechanics
techniques equals cos2 (φ2 −φ1) = 3/4 = 75%. Subsequently, Feynman also shows essentially that quantum theory
is not compatible with a local hidden-variable theory of classical type since imposing this compatibility leads to
theoretical predictions that are in disagreement with experimental observations. Indeed, admitting a realistic local
hidden variable description of quantum mechanics, Feynman makes use of clever counting arguments to show that the
probability of agreement between the two detector outputs is necessarily less than 2/3 ≈67% < 75%. The value 2/3
emerges from the fact that when φ2 −φ1 = 30o, the probability of agreement is given by the fraction of experiments
in which the readings of the two detectors agree and equals the ratio between the number of successful experiments
(i.e., 8 in the best possible scenario) and the number of possible experiments (i.e., 12) [3]. Remarkably, without ever
mentioning Bell [4], Feynman oﬀers in Ref. [1] an alternative demonstration of Bell’s Theorem [5]. In a sense, this
comes as no surprise today given that Feynman’s approach to quantum theory is well-known for being simple and
extremely powerful [6]. In view of this discrepancy between experiments and local hidden-variable theories of classical
type, Feynman concludes that in order to eﬃciently simulate large quantum systems speciﬁed by highly entangled
states, one needs a computer itself built of quantum mechanical elements that are governed by quantum mechanical
rules. With this conclusion, Feynman envisions the concept of a quantum computer. For this reason, Ref. [1] can
be justly regarded as one of the most inﬂuential written pieces of work that set in motion the hunt for a physical
realization of a quantum computer [7].
Despite the relevance of Feynman’s insights, the content of the work in Ref. [1] does not oﬀer speciﬁc technical
details on how a quantum mechanical computer was presumed to run or how a simulation itself would come to a
physical realization [8]. Of course, Feynman arrived at his work in Ref. [1] after quite some deep thinking with
a sound knowledge of the existing models of computation [9] together with their most relevant thermodynamical
aspects [10]. Furthermore, among other things, he was rather mindful of the fact that the physical realization of
such a quantum computing machine would have been rather challenging. In Ref. [11], for instance, he points out
the signiﬁcance of deepening our understanding about how to manipulate and control the arrangements of things (for
instance, spins) on an atomic scale. Speciﬁcally, he argues that the meaningfulness of eﬃciently performing these tasks

2
permits to get access to an enormously greater range of possible chemical and physical properties that materials and
substances can exhibit. In Ref. [12], Feynman presented a new work on the relation between physics and computation
where he tried to describe with more technical details (compared with the more abstract and general content of the
work in Ref. [1]) the functioning of an ideal quantum computer along with the design of quantum algorithms to be
run on it. Despite the assumed ideality of the quantum machine analyzed, Feynman warns (yet again) his readers
that this quantum computer seems to be rather delicate, and the presence of imperfections may cause considerable
damage in practical scenarios. Indeed, in actual scenarios, the quantum computer is expected to interact with the
external world, both for putting data in and for taking data out. Focusing on the register for holding the data, for
instance, there may be issues of cross-talk, interactions between one atom and another in the register, or interactions
of atoms in the register directly with computer components that are responsible for what is occurring along the
program line, that one did not exactly factor in. In other words, Feynman states that one needs to be mindful of
the fact that there may be small terms in the actual Hamiltonian besides the ones deﬁning the ideal Hamiltonian of
the quantum-mechanical machine. To combat some of these imperfections and noisy sources of errors causing loss
of coherence (i.e., decoherence) in quantum systems, Feynman points out that error correcting codes developed for
“normal” computers might help mitigating the number of errors that can happen during the run of an algorithm on
a quantum machine [12].
Finally, Feynman also kept thinking about the meaning of negative probabilities in science [13], an issue that he
mentioned in Ref. [1] while discussing the incompatibility of quantum theory with a local hidden-variable theory
of classical type. Originally, this concept of negative probability captured Feynman’s attention while attempting
to quantize electrodynamics with cutoﬀs (a work on quantum electrodynamics that jointly gave Feynman, Julian
Schwinger, and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga the Nobel prize in physics in 1965, seventeen years before his 1982 IJTP paper).
In Ref. [13], Feynman argues that while the ﬁnal probability of an observable physical event must be positive, a ﬁnal
negative probability simply means that scenario is not attainable or not experimentally veriﬁable. Most interestingly,
during a calculation of probabilities of physical events or states, conditional probabilities and probabilities of imagined
intermediary events or states may be negative. Most compellingly for our speciﬁc discussion on quantum simulations,
as we shall discuss later, the degree of negativity of (quasi) probabilities happens to play a key role in determining
the upper bounds on the experimental conditions for which classical simulations of suﬃciently noisy quantum systems
can be eﬃciently performed [14].
What happened during the last forty years? From Feynman’s 1982 proposal [1], the amount of research and progress
made by a number of experts in a range of areas towards the physical realization of a fully functioning quantum
computer has been impressive. However, during these years, there has been a persistent bouncing from excitement to
dismay. We passed from the level of “conjecture” to the level of “proof” for the universality of quantum simulators
[15]. Indeed, Lloyd described in Ref. [15] how to perform an operation on a quantum computer by providing an
approximate decomposition of the time evolution operator for a quantum system of interacting particles by means of
a short sequence of elementary gates. The ﬁrst two historical “textbook quantum algorithms” of practical importance
in which a quantum computer exhibited a substantial speedup over the best-known classical approaches were invented
by Shor (superpolynomial speedup in factoring large integer numbers [16]) and Grover (quadratic speedup in an
unstructured database search [17]). Moreover, the ﬁrst quantum codes for combatting the loss of coherence caused be
noisy errors in quantum computational tasks in a quantum computer were constructed by Shor [18, 19], Calderbank
[19], and Steane [20].
In Ref. [1], Feynman mentioned the potential diﬃculties with simulating a quantum system of interacting fermions.
Feynman was probably referring to the “sign problem” that happens in the numerical simulation of fermionic or
frustrated models by means of Monte Carlo simulations [21]. The origin of the problem resides in the fact that when
one maps the quantum system to an equivalent classical system, this mapping can give rise to conﬁgurations with
negative Boltzmann weights (ultimately, a consequence of the Pauli uncertainty principle). This situation, in turn,
results in an exponential growth of the simulation time with the number of fermionic particles (a consequence, this,
of the exponential growth of the statistical error during the numerical simulations). This sign problem was shown
to be NP-hard in Ref. [22]. Fortunately, a quantum version of the Metropolis algorithm was proposed in [23]. This
quantum algorithm allows to avoid the sign problem that occurs in classical simulations thanks to the direct sampling
from the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian of the quantum system whose equilibrium and static properties one wishes to
simulate. In Ref. [1], Feynman estimated that one needs generally an exponentially large number of steps to simulate
a quantum process on a classical computer.
In his argumentation, Feynman also discusses the properties of the phase-space quasiprobability distribution (i.e.,
the Wigner distribution). This quasiprobability distribution is almost a classical probability distribution since, unlike

3
classical probabilities, it can assume negative values that underline the quantum-mechanical nature of the physical
system being considered. Interestingly, it was reported in Ref. [14] that for suﬃciently large loss and noise in the
system (i.e., photons) where the quantum process (i.e., boson sampling) occurs, the Wigner function can become
positive. Then, thanks to this achieved positivity, an ordinary classical simulation of the quantum process can be
performed eﬃciently without the need of an exponentially large number of computational steps. The ﬁndings of Ref.
[14] are signiﬁcant since, without suppressing Feynman’s 1982 suggestion about the necessity for quantum simulation,
they specify upper bounds on the experimental conditions for which an ordinary classical computer can work eﬃciently
(with, ideally, a runtime that scales polynomially with the size of the physical system) as a simulator of certain classes
of quantum systems and quantum processes [24]. Note that while the Wigner distribution is a valid positive probability
distribution on Gaussian states (for example, the ground state of the harmonic oscillator and coherent states) and
plays a fundamental role in quantum information and metrology [25], for the purposes of quantum simulation and
computation, non-Gaussian states are desired.
So, when is a quantum-mechanical simulation envisioned in Feynman’s 1982 IJTP paper strictly necessary? When
does it show a clear advantage over the best classical simulations? There are important questions that, unfortunately,
need much more work to be addressed in a meaningful manner [26]. Part of the problem resides in the fact that
two major challenges with quantum computers are the identiﬁcation of good a quantum computer technology and
the selection of a suitable set of scientiﬁc applications for quantum simulations [27]. Current technologies for the
physical implementation of quantum simulations include trapped ions, electronic spins (quantum dots), supercon-
ducting circuits, photons (linear optics), and nuclear spins (NMR-nuclear magnetic resonance). Each technology has
its own strengths and weaknesses, as observed from actual experimental realizations [8]. Two of the most important
performance measures are controllability (i.e., the ability of controlling and measuring each individual qubit) and
scalability (i.e., controlling an array of at least a few tens of qubits). The healthy competition between these diﬀerent
technological platforms for quantum simulations is not a “winner takes all” scenario. Each platform has its own
advantages and limitations, and diﬀerent approaches often address complementary features of quantum simulation.
By a quantum computer, one usually implies a (universal) quantum machine able of performing full blown quantum
computational tasks, including running general algorithms, classical data on quantum devices, or quantum data on
quantum devices. The most prominent model of universal quantum computation is the gate-based quantum computing
model [28]. The process of applying these gates is commonly considered to be controlled by an algorithm that runs
on a digital computer [29]. A fact that is reﬂected into the emergence of quantum programming languages. Indeed,
in recent years, there has been the making of several open source quantum computing program languages such
as Google’s Cirq, IBM’s QisKit, Microsoft’s Quantum Development Kit, and Rigetti’s Quil [27].
However, tasks
like compiling quantum algorithms to gate-circuits, or compiling quantum gate-circuit emulation functions, should
be analyzed in terms of a rigorous mathematical theory of computability [30]. This, in turn, might hide serious
diﬃculties and hinder the possibility for quantum information processing hardware to become relevant in practice.
Returning to the concept of quantum simulations, we remark that it is essentially possible to identify three types
of simulation [8]: i) digital simulation; ii) analog quantum simulation (including, for instance, quantum annealing
[31]); iii) quantum-information inspired algorithms for the classical simulation of quantum systems. It is clear that
within this classiﬁcation of types, a (universal) quantum computer can function as a quantum simulator. However,
one can also use as a quantum simulator an alternative device built speciﬁcally for the simulation, for instance a
quantum annealer.
Then, a digital simulation is intended to run on a (universal) quantum computer, while the
analog quantum simulation is performed on an application-speciﬁc device. Finally, a quantum information inspired
simulation generally runs on (universal) a classical computer. In general, during a quantum simulation, a quantum
simulator is a controllable quantum system used to simulate other quantum-mechanical systems (for instance: time
evolution, ground state, energy levels, thermal energy, heat capacity, correlation functions, and other static and
dynamic observable properties). A successful digital quantum simulation, for instance, happens when the initial-state
preparation, the implementation of the time evolution, and the measurement are realized employing solely polynomial
resources [8]. In Ref. [1], Feynman requires that for an exact simulation to happen, the quantum-mechanical computer
should do exactly as Nature. This statement is reminiscent of what today is known as analog quantum simulation. In
this type of simulation, the Hamiltonian Hsys of the system is directly mapped onto the (controllable) Hamiltonian
Hsim of the simulator, Hsys ↔Hsim. The third type of simulation, instead, is characterized by the use of methods of
quantum information theory into classical numerical algorithms for the simulation of quantum many-body systems.
Interestingly, the above-mentioned sign problem insinuated by Feynman in Ref. [1] was addressed in the context of
this type of quantum simulation in Ref. [23].
In theory, it seems that a clear quantum advantage is expected to occur in the simulation of the quantum dynamics
(i.e., solving the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation) of highly entangled systems of many particles, especially

4
chaotic quantum systems characterized by a signiﬁcant temporal rate of change of entanglement [32]. Indeed, when
the Hamiltonian is local, simulating the temporal evolution with a quantum computer scales polynomially with the
number n of qubits in the system. The best classical algorithms, instead, are speciﬁed by a runtime that scales
exponentially with the number of qubits n. As a matter of fact, the unitary evolution matrix U (t) is exponentially
large, since its size scales like 2n × 2n = en ln(4) ∼en. Speciﬁc applications of quantum simulations are expected to
occur in several ﬁelds of science, including condensed matter, high-energy physics, cosmology, atomic physics, nuclear
physics, and quantum chemistry [8], as well as in the information sciences such as machine learning [33]. Hubbard
models, spin systems, quantum phase transitions, spin glasses, superconductivity, and topological order are excellent
condensed matter phenomena for which quantum simulations are expected to be of great usefulness [8]. For example,
an exact simulation of a one-dimensional transverse Ising spin chain on Rigetti’s and IBM’s quantum processors was
performed in Ref. [34]. Speciﬁcally, the expected value of the transverse magnetization of the ground state of a n = 4
Ising chain as a function of the transverse ﬁeld strength was simulated with Rigetti’s 19-qubit processor (processor
Acorn with quantum software pyQuil) and the two IBM 5-qubit and 16-qubit processors (ibmq×4 and ibmq×5,
respectively, with software QisKit). Furthermore, using these same three quantum processors, the time evolution
simulation of the transverse magnetization for the state |↑↑↑↑⟩of a n = 4 Ising chain was executed. In this second
set of simulations, in particular, the magnetization turns out to be smaller than expected in intensity. However, the
simulation does reproduce the expected oscillatory pattern [34].
It is worthwhile pointing out that classical simulations are one of the possible techniques to benchmark quantum
computers, even though these simulations are exponentially demanding due to the exponential scaling of the Hilbert
space in which the quantum state is deﬁned, as a function of the system size. Nonetheless, people are often interested
in particular states that belong to peculiar subspaces of the full Hilbert space. Then several techniques were introduced
over the years to represent and evolve such states, culminating with Tensor Network Methods [35–37]. Tensor network
methods allow to approximate a quantum state by eﬃciently compressing its information, introducing a controllable
error, and can be used for the simulation of quantum computers behavior. It is still unclear where which approach
exhibits an advantageous behavior. For instance, a recent experiment on IBM’s superconducting quantum processor
with 127 qubits claiming a quantum advantage [38] was outperformed by tensor network methods shortly after [39]
in terms of accuracy and precision in simulating a kicked Ising quantum system.
Moreover, an excellent proving ground for studying the power of quantum simulations is high energy physics
because of its very rich quantum-mechanical content [40]. In particular, the theory of strong interactions mediated
by gluons (i.e., QCD-quantum chromodynamics) has several challenging simulation problems, given the enormous
dimension of the Hilbert space together with the intense coupling strength between the interacting components of
the larger composite quantum systems. Indeed, QCD theory necessitates of a larger number of qubits per site since
it is speciﬁed by six ﬂavors of quarks- each one with four Dirac degrees of freedom and three colors [27].
The
application of quantum simulators to cosmology is especially useful because, in general, cosmological phenomena are
not experimentally accessible. In this context, fascinating applications include the quantum simulation of the Unruh
eﬀect [41] and the quantum simulation of the Hawking black-hole radiation [42, 43]. In Ref. [41], the observation of
a thermal ﬂux of particles in vacuum by an accelerating observer was suggested to be emulated in terms of phonon
excitation of trapped ions. In Ref. [42], a ﬂowing ﬂuid of ultracold atoms divided into
two connected regions is
considered. In one region, the ﬂuid moves at a supersonic speed. In the other one, it moves at subsonic speed. Then,
the black hole event horizon is simulated by the boundary between these two regions. Furthermore, when a pair of
sound waves is produced in the vicinity of this boundary (in analogy to a pair of particles created from vacuum of
space near a black hole event horizon), one of the waves is absorbed into the supersonic region, and the other one is
radiated away from the region (in analogy to the Hawking radiation). Quite remarkably, recent promising applications
of quantum computing and simulation have been proposed in the ﬁeld of drug discovery [44] and ﬁnance [45] as well.
Current focus in the ﬁeld of quantum simulation and computation emphasizes the search algorithms that demon-
strate a quantum advantage over comparable classical computation, vs. quantum supremacy, where the latter demon-
strates the execution of a quantum algorithm (not necessarily “practical”) that is computationally diﬃcult or near
impossible to perform on a classical computing resource. In Ref. [46], Google’s 53-qubit Weber quantum processor
with programmable superconducting qubits based on the Sycamore architecture was used for sampling the output of a
pseudo-random quantum circuit acting on 53 working qubits arranged in a two-dimensional array such that entangling
two-qubit quantum gates can be performed on neighboring qubits in the array. Comparing with the state-of-the-art
classical supercomputers, the authors arrived at the conclusion that, despite the artiﬁcial nature of the analyzed
quantum task, a signiﬁcant quantum advantage (quantum supremacy) was achieved [46]. However, the very same
Google’s 53-qubit Weber quantum processor was used in Ref. [47] in simulations of properties of actual correlated
molecules in quantum chemistry and, its performance was not equally successful. The processor was used for two

5
types of simulations. In the ﬁrst task, the objective was to simulate the energy states of an 8-atom cluster of iron
(Fe) and sulfur (S) found in the catalytic core of the enzyme nitrogenase. In the second task, the aim was to study
the collective behavior (for instance, thermal energy and heat capacity) of magnetic spins in the crystalline material
alpha-ruthenium trichloride (α-RuCl3). Despite the fact that the largest simulations for α-RuCl3 performed with
11 qubits, 310 two-qubit gates, and 782 single-qubit gates were not successful, simulations with a smaller number of
two-qubit gates performed much better (most likely attributed to less overall system noise/decoherence issues associ-
ated with smaller circuit depth, in the absence of any currently reliable quantum error correction implementations).
Speciﬁcally, simplifying the Hamiltonians into eﬀective low-energy spin models and exploiting signiﬁcant processing of
data from exact classical simulations of similar tractable problems, the quantum simulations with up to 100 two-qubit
gates lead to qualitatively correct properties of the spin structure, the spectrum of the excited-state, and the heat
capacity of the materials [47].
We do not claim of having discussed in this paper the state of the art of quantum computers. Indeed, this was not
our goal. However, in an attempt to get closer to such a state of the art, we point out that there exist nowadays
hardware platforms with an order of thousands qubits. Furthermore, digital quantum simulations with more than
100 qubits are performed for the study of hadron dynamics in the Schwinger model [48] or, alternatively, up to 64
qubits for equivariant quantum neural networks investigations [49]. For additional reviews on quantum computing
applications in high energy physics, we refer to Refs.[50–52]. In particular, the state of the art of quantum computing
examples, algorithm methods, and hardware challenges are discussed in Ref. [50]. As a curious historical side remark,
we point out that Feynman’s 1982 IJTP paper was not cited much shortly after publication in the high energy physics
community. Indeed, a very rapid increase of citations took place only starting approximately twelve years ago. For
additional interesting reviews on algorithms and methods used in quantum computing for high energy physics as well,
including the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) and the Variational Quantum Eigensolver
(VQE), we refer to Refs. [53] and [54], respectively.
In summary, Feynman’s 1982 IJTP paper has paved the way towards the current state of quantum computing
which is commonly referred to as the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era [32]. The intermediate-scale is
speciﬁed by the modest number of qubits and gate ﬁdelity. Within NISQ, quantum processors can contain more that
thousands qubits. However, these NISQ quantum processors are neither advanced enough yet for fault-tolerance nor
large enough to achieve quantum advantage. Moreover, NISQ quantum processors cannot yet perform continuous
quantum correction to mitigate the detrimental eﬀects of quantum decoherence that emerge from their interaction
with the external environment. These eﬀects, as Feynman warned in 1982, must be taken into account for physically
meaningful quantum simulations to occur. As progress is made towards these important goals, it seems to be peacefully
agreed upon that incorporating relevant aspects of the physical problem being investigated into the design of quantum
algorithms (in analogy, to a certain extent, to the design of approximate quantum error correcting codes [55]) can
signiﬁcantly enhance the performance the quantum simulators and, consequently, accelerate the progress towards (a
physically meaningful) quantum advantage [56].
As scientists, our responsibility is to keep progressing, keep solving wonderful mysteries, use our scientiﬁc imagi-
nation, do what we can, think freely, welcome doubts, and accept constructive criticisms [57]. Good things happen
with hard work. With some luck, even in the absence of a new physical theory to be tested, unforeseen discoveries
might arrive while experimenting with quantum-mechanical simulators of next quantum computing generations.
Acknowledgments
S.M. acknowledges support from Italian Ministry of Universities and Research under “PNRR MUR project
PE0000023-NQSTI”. The authors thank an anonymous referee for useful comments leading to an improved ver-
sion of this manuscript. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of their home Institutions.
[1] R. P. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467 (1982).
[2] A. Peres, Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1995).
[3] M. Mansuripur, Spin-1 photons, spin-1/2 electrons, Bell’s inequalities, and Feynman’s special perspective on quantum
mechanics, Proceedings of SPIE 12205, Spintronics XV; 12205OB (2022).

6
[4] A. Whitaker, Richard Feynman and Bell’s Theorem, Am. J. Phys. 84, 493 (2016).
[5] J. S. Bell, On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox, Physics 1, 195 (1964).
[6] P. Goyal, Derivation of quantum theory from Feynman’s rules, Phys. Rev. A89, 032120 (2014).
[7] J. Preskill, Quantum Computing 40 Years Later. In Feynman Lectures on Computation, Chapter 7, pag.193, Tony Hey
(Editor), CRC Press (2023).
[8] I. M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Quantum simulation, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 153 (2014).
[9] E. Fredkin and T. Toﬀoli, Conservative logic, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 219 (1982).
[10] C. H. Bennett, The thermodynamics of computation- a review, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 905 (1982).
[11] R.
P.
Feynman,
There’s
plenty
of
room
at
the
bottom.
Transcript
of
a
talk
given
by
Feynman
on
De-
cember
29,
1959
at
the
annual
meeting
of
the
American
Physical
Society
at
Caltech.
Available
at
http://calteches.library.caltech.edu/47/2/1960Bottom.pdf.
[12] R. P. Feynman, Quantum mechanical computers, Found. Phys. 16, 507 (1986).
[13] R. P. Feynman, Negative probability, in Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David Bohm, eds. F. David Peat and
Basil Hiley, Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd, London, 1987, pp. 235–248.
[14] S. Rahimi-Keshari, T. C. Ralph, and C. M. Caves, Suﬃcient conditions for eﬃcient classical simulation of quantum optics,
Phys. Rev. X6, 021039 (2016).
[15] S. Lloyd, Universal quantum simulators, Science 273, 1073 (1996).
[16] P. W. Shor, Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer, SIAM J.
Comput. 26, 1484 (1997).
[17] L. K. Grover, Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a needle in a haystack, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 325 (1997).
[18] P. W. Shor, Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory, Phys. Rev. A52, R2493 (1995).
[19] A. R. Calderbank and P. W. Shor, Good quantum error correcting codes exist, Phys. Rev. A54, 1098 (1996).
[20] A. M. Steane, Multiple-particle interference and quantum error correction, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A452, 2551 (1996).
[21] E. Y. Loh Jr., J. E. Gubernatis, R. T. Scalettar, S. R. White, D. J. Scalapino, and R. L. Sugar, Sign problem in the
numerical simulation of many-electron systems, Phys. Rev. B41, 9301 (1990).
[22] M. Troyer and U.-J. Wiese, Computational complexity and fundamental limitations to fermionic quantum Monte Carlo
simulations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 170201 (2005).
[23] K. Temme, T. J. Osborne, K. G. Vollbrecht, D. Poulin, and F. Verstrate, Quantum Metropolis sampling, Nature 471, 87
(2011).
[24] J. Franson, Classical simulation of quantum systems?, Physics 9, 66 (2016).
[25] X.-B. Wang, T. Hiroshima, A. Tomita, and M. Hayashi, Quantum information with Gaussian states, Physics
Reports 448, 1 (2007).
[26] P. Ball, Simulations using a quantum computer show the technology’s current limits, Physics 15, 175 (2022).
[27] Y. Alexeev et al., Quantum computer systems for scientiﬁc discovery, PRX Quantum 2, 017001 (2021).
[28] E. G. Rieﬀel and W. H. Polak, Quantum Computing: A Gentle Introduction, MIT Press (2014).
[29] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University
Press (2000).
[30] M. B. Pour-El and J. I. Richards, Computability in Analysis and Physics, Cambridge University Press (2016).
[31] A. Das and B. K. Chakrabarti, Quantum annealing and analog quantum computation, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1061 (2008).
[32] J. Preskill, Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond, Quantum 2, 79 (2018).
[33] J. Biamonte et al., Quantum Machine Learning, Nature 549, 195 (2017).
[34] A. Cervera-Lierta, Exact Ising model simulation on a quantum computer, Quantum 2, 114 (2018).
[35] R. Orus, A practical introduction to tensor networks: Matrix product states and projected entangled pair states, Annals of
Physics 349, 117 (2014).
[36] M. C. Banuls and K. Cichy, Review on novel methods for lattice gauge theories, Rep. Prog. Phys. 83, 024401 (2020).
[37] J. I. Cirac, D. Perez-Garcia, N. Schuch, and F. Verstraete, Matrix product states and projected entangled pair states:
Concepts, symmetries, theorems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 045003 (2021).
[38] Y. Kim et al., Evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance, Nature 618, 500 (2023).
[39] J. Tindall, M. Fishman, E. M. Stoudenmire, and D. Sels, Eﬃcient tensor network simulation of IBM’s Eagle kicked Ising
experiment, PRX Quantum 5, 010308 (2024).
[40] C. W. Bauer et al., Quantum simulation for high-energy physics, PRX Quantum 4, 027001 (2023).
[41] P. M. Alsing, J. P. Dowling, and G. J. Milburn, Ion trap simulations of quantum ﬁelds in an expanding Universe, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 94, 220401 (2005).
[42] J. R. M. de Nova, K. Golubkov, V. I. Kolobov, and J. Steinhauer, Observation of thermal Hawking radiation and its
temperature in an analogue black hole, Nature 569, 688 (2019).
[43] S. Weinfurtner, Quantum simulation of black-hole radiation, Nature 569, 634 (2019).
[44] Y. Cao et al., Potential of quantum computing for drug discovery, IBM Journal of Research and Development 62, 1 (2018).
[45] D. Herman et al., Quantum computing for ﬁnance, Nature Reviews Physics 5, 450 (2023).
[46] F. Arute et al., Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor, Nature 574, 505 (2019).
[47] R. N. Tazhigulov et al., Simulating models of challenging correlated molecules and materials on a Sycamore quantum
processor, PRX Quantum 3, 040318 (2022).
[48] R. C. Farrell, M. Illa, A. N. Ciavarella, and M. J. Savage, Quantum simulations of hadron dynamics in the Schwinger
model using 112 qubits, arXiv:quant-ph/2401.08044 (2024).
[49] C. Tuysuz, S. Y. Chang, M. Demidik, K. Jansen, S. Vallecorsa, and M. Grossi, Symmetry breaking in geometric quantum

7
machine learning in the presence of noise, arXiv:quant-ph/2401.10293 (2024).
[50] A. Di Meglio et al., Quantum computing for high-energy physics: State of the art and challenges. Summary of the QC4HEP
Working Group, arXiv:quant-ph/2307.03236 (2023).
[51] M. C. Banuls et al., Simulating lattice gauge theories within quantum technologies, Eur. Phys. J. D74, 165 (2020).
[52] L. Funcke, T. Hartung, K. Jansen, and S. Kuhn, Review on quantum computing for lattice ﬁeld theory, Proceedings of
Science 430, The 39th International Symposium on Lattice Field Theory (LATTICE2022), 228 (2023).
[53] K. Blekos, D. Brand, A. Ceschini, C.-H. Chou, R.-H. Li, K. Pandya, and A. Summer, A review on quantum approximate
optimization algorithm and its variants, Phys. Rep. 1068, 1 (2024).
[54] J. Tilly et al., The variational quantum eigensolver: A review of methods and best practices, Phys. Rep. 986, 1 (2022).
[55] C. Cafaro and P. van Loock, Approximate quantum error correction for generalized amplitude-damping errors, Phys. Rev.
A89, 022316 (2014).
[56] L. Clinton et al., Towards near-term quantum simulation of materials, Nature Communications 15, 211 (2024).
[57] R. P. Feynman, The value of science, Engineering and Science 19, 13 (1955).
