The Science and Legacy of Richard Phillips Feynman
Avinash Dhara, Apoorva D. Patelb, and Spenta R. Wadiaa
aInternational Centre for Theoretical Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Bangalore 560089
bCentre for High Energy Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012
October 2018
Abstract
This year is the 100th birth anniversary of Richard Phillips Feynman. This article commemorates
his scientiﬁc contributions and lasting legacy.
1
Richard Feynman
Bongo player and
Theoretical Physicist
Richard Phillips Feynman was one of the most inﬂuential, iconoclastic and
famous physicists of the second half of the twentieth century1, who made profound
contributions to physics and its visual language (the Feynman diagrams). More
importantly, he provided a new meaning to what it means to understand the
character of physical law, unfolding it in his uniquely refreshing style to explain
the ‘beauty of world’.
Feynman was born on 11th May 1918 in New York city, and grew up in Far
Rockaway in Queens.
He was an undergraduate at MIT during 1935-39, and
got his doctorate from Princeton University in 1942, advised by John Wheeler.
Besides his work with Wheeler on classical electrodynamics, he wrote a thesis on
“The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics” that reformulates non-
relativistic quantum mechanics in terms of path integrals. During and after his
PhD, he was involved with the Manhattan Project till 1945. After that he spent
5 years at Cornell University, where he developed his Nobel prize winning work
on how to do calculations in quantum electrodynamics using Feynman diagrams.
Feynman moved to Caltech in 1950, and spent the rest of his career there till he
died on 15th February 1988. From 1959 onwards he was Richard Chace Tolman
Professor of Theoretical Physics at Caltech. During his 38 years at Caltech, he
worked on a variety of problems posed by mother nature, and covering all four
fundamental interactions. These include the quantum theory of liquid Helium, turbulence, V-A theory of the
weak force, quantization of gravity and of Yang-Mills theory, quantum theory of open systems, the parton model
of hadronic physics and quantum computing. To each of these problems he made lasting contributions that
bear the stamp of his insights and originality.
He inﬂuenced the way physicists think about physics, especially physical processes whose description requires
the quantum theory. Feynman’s approach to physics was to show how the solution to a problem unravels, aided
by a visual language that encapsulates complicated mathematical expressions.
James Gleick put this very
succinctly, “Feynman’s reinvention of quantum mechanics did not so much explain how the world was, or why
it was that way, as to tell how to confront the world. It was not knowledge of or knowledge about. It was
knowledge how to.” He went to the heart of the problem he was working on, built up the solutions from simple
ground rules in a step by step nuts and bolts way, articulating the steps as he built up the solution, keeping in
mind that science is highly constrained by the fact that it is a description of the natural world. He laid bare
the strategy of the solution, and was explicit about the various diﬃculties that need to be surmounted, perhaps
now or in the next attempt to solve the problem: “In physics the truth is rarely perfectly clear.” Feynman’s
1Some general references for Feynman’s life and research are Refs. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
1
arXiv:1810.07409v2  [physics.hist-ph]  19 May 2019

attitude to ‘fundamental physics’ is well put in the collection, ‘The Pleasure of Finding Things Out’: “People
say to me, ‘Are you looking for the ultimate laws of physics?’ No, I’m not, I’m just looking to ﬁnd out more
about the world, and if it turns out there is a simple ultimate law which explains everything, so be it, that
would be very nice to discover.”
His most original contribution is the reformulation of quantum mechanics in terms of ‘path integrals’ and
the visual language of Feynman diagrams that goes with it. Today it is the deﬁning formulation of the standard
model of elementary particles, non-perturbative gauge theories on a space-time lattice, quantum statistical
physics, string theory, quantum gravity etc. Feynman’s method and generalizations not only aﬀord a conceptual
unity in the treatment of quantum systems and their classical limits, but also give at weak coupling a powerful
computational tool using the pictorial representation of processes using Feynman diagrams. They are the daily
fare of physicists across the physical sciences. Feynman diagrams are ubiquitous in high energy physics, many
body physics and statistical physics.
Feynman was a great teacher: the “Feynman Lectures on Physics” have inspired generations of physicists
from all over the world. They were introductory physics lectures delivered to beginning students of physics
at Caltech during 1961-62, but are a learning experience even for mature physicists. Now Caltech has made
available their high quality internet edition free [2].
Besides this monumental 3-volume lectures, there are
numerous talks and interviews in which we see the essential Feynman emerging. He had deep misgivings about
‘authority’ and was willing to question anybody on any subject that can be discussed using reason.
This
liberation from authority was especially true when it came to explaining the real world. He said, “Science is
the belief in the ignorance of experts.” He took the notion of ‘understanding’ natural phenomena to a diﬀerent
level: “What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
There was a deliberate lack of ‘urban polish’ about Feynman. His childhood was in a family of very modest
means in Far Rockaway, and throughout his life he felt true to his origins and upheld his ‘boy from the country
image’. He is sometimes accused, by the ‘very cultured’, of building up a certain image of himself to be a cult
ﬁgure. Any historical ﬁgure that creates a new culture in a society could be accused of this. History abounds
with examples of people like Newton, Einstein, Beethoven, Dylan, Gandhi, all of whom created a new dimension
of human culture within their domains. How can one disassociate their persona from what they created? All
these people stood for a new way of thinking or doing things. Feynman was one of them. He created a new
social culture by making science the centerpiece of any yearning to grapple at the ‘truth’ about the natural
world, and went public about it. Not only that, he gave the scientist a new informal look, simplicity of language
and ﬂair, so that young boys and girls in far away impoverished lands could also be attracted by the romance,
and believe that they can also do physics...the bongo player who also did theoretical physics! And in there you
read Feynman talking about all sorts of phenomena...the universe in a glass of wine...the sloshing of turbulent
ﬂuids...there is a feeling that there is a sort of unity in science and that there are some laws that bring order to
the immense diversity of the natural world.
Feynman was one of the few scientists of his generation to grasp the importance of science in promoting
democracy and human rights.
He told a Seattle audience [7] in 1963 that the need of scientists to freely
investigate the world while ‘dealing with doubt and uncertainty...is of very great value, [one that] extends
beyond the sciences’. He added, “I feel a responsibility as a scientist who knows the great value of a satisfactory
philosophy of ignorance, and the progress made possible by such a philosophy, progress which is the fruit of
freedom of thought...to proclaim the value of this freedom and to teach that doubt is not to be feared, but that
it is to be welcomed as the possibility of a new potential for human beings. If you know that you are not sure,
you have a chance to improve the situation. I want to demand this freedom for future generations.”
Feynman remarked while teaching a course, “Einstein was a tall man. He could keep his head above the
clouds, and his feet on the ground. For those of us who are not as tall, we have to make a choice.” His own
choice was clearly to keep his feet on the ground. He was often not satisﬁed with high-level review talks. To
ﬁnd out the details, he would go and talk to the students, technicians and engineers, who did the actual ground
work. He brought this attitude, together with his imagination, acumen and honesty, to reveal the simple truth
about the explosion of the Challenger shuttle just after take oﬀ. He demonstrated [8], as the world watched on
television, the inﬂuence of cold on the resilience of the O-ring rubber by dropping it into a glass of ice water!
Dyson later said [4], “The public saw with their own eyes how science is done, how a great scientist thinks with
his hands, how nature gives a clear answer when a scientist asks a clear question.” Feynman himself concluded
his personal report saying, “For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for
nature cannot be fooled.”
The rest of this article is devoted to giving the reader a tour of the great scientiﬁc achievements of Richard
Feynman. The tour is roughly divided into three parts: Quantum Electrodynamics and high energy physics,
Condensed matter physics and Quantum computing. Also included are some personal reﬂections of some who
2

knew Feynman to varying degrees, which illustrate his interactions with students. The tour concludes with
Feynman’s Nobel banquet speech [9].
2
Space-time approach to Quantum Electrodynamics
Feynman did his graduate studies in Princeton University under the guidance of John Wheeler with whom
he immediately embarked on a quest for a consistent quantum theory of electromagnetism.
Feynman had
already become familiar with the problems of quantizing Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory as an undergraduate
student at MIT, from reading the books of Dirac2 and Heitler. During these studies he had learnt that the main
diﬃculties lay with the inﬁnities which one encountered in calculating the self-energy and vacuum polarization
eﬀects. The former arises from the familiar classical divergence associated with the interaction of a charged
particle with its own ﬁeld while the latter is a purely quantum eﬀect and arises from the possibility of production
of virtual electron-positron pairs. Feynman was also bothered by the inﬁnities due to the zero point energies of
an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. He sought a new formulation of quantum
electrodynamics (QED) that would eliminate these divergences in a consistent manner. He also wanted the new
formulation to be manifestly relativistic and gauge invariant.
Feynman’s ﬁrst attempt (with Wheeler) to deal with the divergence due to self-interaction in classical
electromagnetism was to eliminate it by deﬁnition.
The new theory replaced the electromagnetic ﬁeld by
a delayed action-at-a-distance principle and a non-local theory of charges [10].
In this theory, each charge
interacted with all the other charges but not with itself and the electromagnetic ﬁeld was a derived, not
fundamental, concept. But to get the radiation reaction right, Feynman and Wheeler had to assume that the
interactions of moving charges occurred via retarded as well as advanced wave propagation; in fact, to get the
magnitude of the radiation reaction right they found that the precise combination involved was half retarded
and half advanced. This time-symmetric propagation was to play a crucial role in Feynman’s ﬁnal formulation
of QED.
Now although the Wheeler-Feynman theory was able to correctly reproduce all the classical phenomena of
Maxwell’s theory without having the divergence associated with self-interactions of charges, there were several
problems in quantizing it. For example, spontaneous emission of a photon from an atom in empty space was
hard to understand in the absence of electromagnetic ﬁeld degrees of freedom. Moreover, with the measurement
of Lamb shift, which was understood as the diﬀerence between the self-energies of a free electron and one bound
inside an atom, it was clear that the Feynman-Wheeler action-at-a-distance theory could not be the classical
starting point for a quantum electrodynamics theory.
Even though Feynman’s ﬁnal formulation of QED discarded the Feynman-Wheeler approach, this route to it
turned out to be crucial for the ﬁnal formulation in two aspects. One was the concept of half-retarded and half-
advanced wave propagation3, which turned out to be necessary for incorporating positrons in QED4 via their
interpretation as electrons travelling backward in time [11], an idea that was earlier advocated by St¨uckelberg
[12]. The second was the diﬃculty in quantizing Feynman-Wheeler theory using the known procedures based on
Hamiltonian methods. The action for Feynman-Wheeler theory involved entire space-time trajectories, including
trajectories for two particles (involving two proper time variables) in the interaction term. So Feynman had
to invent a new quantization procedure which would directly use the action or the Lagrangian rather than the
Hamiltonian. As described in the next section, this was the motivation to which we owe Feynman’s invention
of the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics.
Feynman’s ﬁnal formulation of QED was based on the conventional Maxwell theory. It brought back local
interactions via the electromagnetic ﬁeld, and consequently the divergences associated with self-energy and
vacuum polarization. The solution to these divergence problems came from an entirely new direction, and
involved the new concepts of regularization and renormalization, the ﬁrst rudimentary steps towards which
were already taken in the works of several scientists since early 1930’s5.
2Feynman refered to Dirac as “my hero”, and followed his tracks many times while adding his own twists.
3Modern relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory calculations incorporate this through the famous Feynman propagator, which is an
essential element of all scattering matrix elements.
4More generally, it accounts for eﬀects due to antiparticles in any quantum ﬁeld theory, even in bosonic cases where Dirac’s hole
theory for antiparticles is not available.
5For a history of these eﬀorts, see for example Ref. [5].
3

2.1
Regularization and Renormalization
Regularization is a “cut-oﬀ” procedure by which divergent calculations are rendered ﬁnite and well-deﬁned. The
divergences are recovered in the limit in which the cut-oﬀparameter is removed. The main diﬃculty here is that
of inventing a relativistic and gauge-invariant cut-oﬀprocedure. But once this is done, it enables meaningful
calculations in theories like QED. Renormalization is a deeper concept which is based on the fact that because
of interactions the measured parameters of mass, charge, etc. are in general diﬀerent from the corresponding
‘bare parameters’ which appear in the Lagrangian. The main question then is whether all the divergences can
be consistently removed by redeﬁning physical parameters in terms of the bare parameters and the cut-oﬀ.
Feynman’s key contribution to this discussion was to introduce, for the ﬁrst time, a relativistic cut-oﬀin
QED [13]. The cut-oﬀhad the physical interpretation of the size of an electron. The method reproduced results
in agreement with those obtained by Schwinger and others. It even applied to mesons and the theories of strong
nuclear interactions. Soon after this, a technically much simpler, relativistic and gauge-invariant regularization
procedure was invented by Pauli and Villars, which now bears their names. Feynman quickly adopted this
method to his formulation of QED to make the self-energy and vacuum polarization calculations ﬁnite. With
this ingredient in place, he ﬁnally had a simple set of (diagrammatic and visualizable) rules, and an eﬃcient
calculational technique, for computing the matrix element of any QED process in various orders of perturbation
theory [14].
The great simpliﬁcation that Feynman achieved in his way of doing QED was because of his emphasis on
the overall space-time point of view, as opposed to the prevailing Hamiltonian point of view. Feynman looked
at the whole space-time evolution of a given system at once, rather than tracing this evolution in detail at every
instant of time. By forsaking the Hamiltonian method, he was able to accomplish the marriage of relativity and
quantum theory most naturally, and also achieve great simplicity in calculations, overcoming many technical
and conceptual diﬃculties.
2.2
Feynman Diagrams
The tools developed by Feynman in the form of space-time diagrams, ‘Feynman diagrams’ as they are
Tree-level
Feynman
diagrams
for
Compton scattering:
solid lines rep-
resent electron trajectories while wavy
lines
represent
photon
trajectories.
Time ﬂows upwards and space extends
in the horizontal direction.
called now, were intended to represent physical scattering processes as
they happened in space and time. In addition, each element in these
diagrams represented a deﬁnite mathematical expression. Thus the
mathematical expression for the matrix element for any physical pro-
cess could be written down simply by following the rules for writing
mathematical expressions for the various elements in the correspond-
ing Feynman diagram. The illustration shows examples of Feynman
diagrams that contribute to the electron-photon scattering matrix el-
ement.
Feynman showed that his approach lent enormous simpliﬁcation
to calculations, and made precision tests of QED possible. He had
arrived at these rules using his newly developed path integral formula-
tion of quantum theory. As this formulation was not generally known
at that time, Feynman’s approach took some time to be widely ac-
cepted by the scientiﬁc community. But once the practical utility of
Feynman diagrams and the rules had been demonstrated, they were
quickly adopted. Eventually Dyson established complete equivalence of Feynman’s approach to the far more
complicated approaches of Schwinger and Tomonaga.
Feynman’s space-time diagrams and the associated tools developed by him are truly fundamental, in the
sense that they have found applications beyond QED and greatly inﬂuenced the development of quantum ﬁeld
theory in general. The diagrams provide a visual representation of the complex microscopic world of elementary
particles. Today these tools are an essential element of the scientiﬁc training of every theoretical physicist.
3
Path Integrals
An early by-product of Feynman’s research on electrodynamics was the creation of the ‘path integral’ formulation
of quantum mechanics (QM). Early days of QM were dominated by Hamiltonian methods. Both Schr¨odinger’s
and Heisenberg’s formulations of QM, which Dirac showed to be equivalent, used these methods. Feynman
could not apply these methods, in any known way, to quantize his non-standard action-at-a-distance theory
4

for electrodynamics involving space-time trajectories of electrons. He needed a Lagrangian formulation of the
subject, so he created one! It happens to be a rare instance, where the subject went from a thesis [15], to a
review article [16], to a textbook [17], with not many publications in between. It also illustrates Feynman’s
style of work, and the care he took in formulating a new approach.
In an important but not widely known paper published eight years earlier, Dirac had identiﬁed the quantity
eiS/¯h, where S(X(T), x(t)) =
R T
t L(x, ˙x, t) dt is the action corresponding to the propagation trajectory of a
particle from the initial point x(t) to the ﬁnal point X(T), as the semi classical analogue of the quantum
mechanical kernel associated with the time evolution [18]. This was done on the basis of the Hamilton-Jacobi
theory and variational methods, and Dirac did not go beyond making this observation since he believed that
the correspondence of the action with the phase of the kernel could only work at the semi-classical level, in line
with the belief generally prevalent from the beginning of QM. This correspondence indeed does not work for
ﬁnite time evolution, but it does when the evolution interval is divided into an inﬁnite number of inﬁnitesimal
steps, and a sum over complete set of states is inserted at each time-slice. Feynman asserted that this time-
sliced correspondence is actually exact, derived the Schr¨odinger equation from it, and demonstrated how the
time-sliced integrals reproduce well-established results of QM. This deﬁnition produced a space-time picture
analogous to Huygens’s construction of wave propagation. There is an amplitude exp(iS/¯h) for each possible
path a particle could traverse from the initial to the ﬁnal point, with S being the action for the path. The
complete quantum mechanical amplitude for a particle to go from the initial to the ﬁnal point is the superposition
or ‘sum of all possible paths’ between the two points. Feynman thus established a new general procedure for
quantizing any classical system starting from its Lagrangian or action. He published all this in his thesis in the
spring of 1942 [15].
The meaning of the underlying limiting time-slicing procedure and the precise deﬁnition of the ‘sum of all
possible paths’ was clariﬁed by Feynman in his famous 1948 review [16], and several connections to the standard
results of QM were added in his authoritative textbook [17]. The power of the path integral formulation of
QM lies in the possibility of decomposing a complex system into several pieces and ‘integrating out parts of it’,
which is not at all easy to do in the Schr¨odinger or Heisenberg formulations of QM. Such a partial integration
generically converts pure quantum states to mixed states, and has to be implemented on the density matrix and
not on the wave-function. It is also unavoidable in dealing with practical problems, because no physical system
can be perfectly insulated from its environment and other inaccessible degrees of freedom. Together with his
student Vernon, Feynman showed how the behavior of a quantum system of interest can be described in terms of
its own variables only, once the external (or environmental) quantum systems that it is coupled to are integrated
out. All the external eﬀects are then included in an ‘inﬂuence functional’, which depends on the system’s own
variables, and modiﬁes the undisturbed path integral evolution amplitude eiS/¯h. They explicitly evaluated the
inﬂuence functionals for the cases of Gaussian noise as well as linear coupling to environment (modelled as a set
of harmonic oscillators), and pointed out how generic ﬂuctuation-dissipation relations emerged from the results.
This strategy of tackling a complicated quantum problem by integrating out parts of it, and then describing
the remaining system of interest using an ‘eﬀective action’, is now a well-known powerful technique with a large
number of applications.
Since Feynman’s original work on QM for non-relativistic spinless particles, the path integral formulation
has been extended to include particles with spin, relativity and anomalous quantum ﬁeld theories (where
symmetries of the classical action are broken by quantization).
For spin-half particles, it is constructed in
terms of anti-commuting Grassmann variables and abstract Grassmann integration, while anomalous theories
need careful deﬁnition of the integration measure. The quantum path integral amplitude eiS/¯h can also be
converted to the statistical Boltzmann weight e−βH, by analytically continuing the Minkowski time coordinate
to a Euclidean time coordinate. This relation has proved to be extremely useful in carrying over quantum ﬁeld
theory methods to statistical mechanics problems and vice versa. With all these features, the path integral
formulation has proved to be quite powerful in dealing with a variety of problems. Indeed, it is routinely usedas
a non-perturbative deﬁnition of quantum ﬁeld theories discretized on a lattice. Furthermore, it is essential for
quantization of non-abelian gauge theories, which lie at the heart of the Standard Model of strong nuclear and
electroweak interactions. Feynman himself used the formulation in diverse applications such as quantum ﬁeld
theories, statistical mechanics models, the polaron problem, superﬂuidity in liquid helium, Brownian motion
and open dissipative systems.
5

4
Weak Interactions
Feynman’s interest in this area was kindled at the 1956 Rochester Conference where he began to seriously
think about the problem of apparent parity non-conservation in weak interactions. There is the well-publicized
incident of Feynman repeating the question of Martin Block (an experimentalist with whom Feynman was
sharing accommodation during the conference) in the discussion session, as to whether parity might be violated
in K-decays. This was in connection with the hotly debated θ −τ puzzle, which referred to the issue of possible
existence of two particles which had the same mass, were produced in the same proportion all the time and
had all other properties identical, except for having opposite parities. The puzzle would disappear if parity was
not conserved in weak interactions, but at that time such thinking was revolutionary. By early 1957, however,
this question was settled by Lee and Yang who worked out the consequences of parity violation, and made
predictions which were quickly veriﬁed by Wu.
Feynman was excited by these developments as he noticed the appearance of the chiral projection operators
(1 ± γ5)/2 in these works. They connected with his earlier observations about two-component chiral spinors
(whose simplifying features he had already discussed almost a decade earlier), which he believed were more
fundamental than the four-component Dirac spinors. Assuming that only one speciﬁc of the two two-component
chiral projections of all the fermions appeared in weak interactions, he quickly worked out that the law of weak
interactions had to be the universal law of Vector-Axial Vector (V-A) interactions.
Feynman informally reported a preliminary version of this (V-A) theory at the April 1957 Rochester Confer-
ence. At that time the available experimental data on neutron decay was considered to be explained by scalar
and tensor couplings. Using the (V-A) theory Feynman could not hope to correctly reproduce the experimental
observations, and he admitted so in his informal outline of the (V-A) idea at the conference. However, the theo-
retical beauty of these ideas was compelling and upon re-examining the experiments on neutron decay, it seemed
to him that the experimental conclusions were based on rather weak evidence. Convinced about the universality
of (V-A) weak interactions, he wrote his deﬁnitive paper on the subject (with Gell-Mann) in September of the
same year [19]. This work emphasized the use of two-component spinors, the current-current form of the weak
interactions (possibly mediated by heavy intermediate bosons) and the conserved vector current, all of which
were eventually borne out by future experiments.
Feynman had a great sense of achievement in his discovery of the (V-A) law of weak interactions [5]. He did
not think that the (V-A) equations were quite as beautiful as Dirac’s equation or Maxwell’s theory, but they
ﬁlled him with the thrill of a completely new discovery. The (V-A) theory became a starting point for the latter
work by Glashow, Salam and Weinberg on the SU(2)×U(1) gauge theory of electro-weak interactions.
As it transpired, Feynman’s discovery was not without controversy concerning his collaboration with Gell-
Mann, and priority claims and bitterness, especially on the part of Sudarshan who had also, with Marshak,
arrived at the universal (V-A) law by the April 1957 Rochester Conference, though it was not presented there6.
Feynman tried to make amends and was eventually quite happy to share the credit for the discovery with
Sudarshan, Marshak and Gell-Mann.
5
Parton Model
In August 1968, while visiting SLAC to see the experimental measurements on deep inelastic scattering of
electrons by hadrons, Feynman suddenly realized that these observations were measuring the momentum distri-
bution of partons, the constituent parts of a hadron. Over the previous two decades or so, Feynman had been
keenly following the experimental observations and theoretical modelling of composite structure of hadrons,
including the models of Fermi and Yang, Sakata and his school, the S-matrix bootstrap hypothesis, etc. He
was also aware of the quark model of hadrons of Gell-Mann and Zweig, but in the absence of any experimental
observation of fractionally charged quarks, generally physicists did not believe in their existence. Earlier that
year in 1968, he had begun thinking about a hadron as a collection of many parts, in a way that was not based
on any speciﬁc microscopic model of hadrons, but incorporated general features expected of a large class of
composite models that could be described by relativistic quantum ﬁeld theories. The SLAC measurements sud-
denly seemed to him to bring the partons to life. The SLAC theorist, James Bjorken, who the experimentalists
consulted, had already deduced [21] that the experimental results pointed to scaling in deep inelastic scattering,
i.e. he had found that the results depended only on a particular combination of energy and momentum transfer,
rather than independently on both the variables, and could be understood on the basis of hard scattering by
point-like constituents of nucleons. However, Bjorken used the language and techniques of current algebra,
6An account of this history as reported by Marshak is available in Ref. [20].
6

which was rather too abstract for the SLAC experimentalists, who found the partons concept of Feynman, and
the associated physical picture of the scattering measuring their momentum distribution, appealing and easy
to grasp. So his intuitive interpretation, and the parton model on which it was based, quickly became popular.
Feynman went on to formulate the general problem of deep-inelastic scattering of electrons (equivalently
virtual photons) and neutrinos (equivalently virtual massive intermediate vector bosons of the weak interactions)
by nucleons in terms of the parton concept, and he extensively lectured on it [22]. He introduced the concepts
of inclusive and exclusive processes—the former averages over all possible outcomes of a scattering process,
while the latter describes detailed properties of each possible outcome. In the absence of any speciﬁc theory of
strong interactions, his ideas were not based on any particular ﬁeld theory but on the general characteristics of
such theories. The partons were to be understood as the basic quanta of the underlying ﬁeld theory, and the
hadronic wavefunction as containing the amplitude for ﬁnding conﬁgurations of partons with various momenta.
Feynman left the question of whether his partons were merely another name for already proposed quarks, or
something completely diﬀerent, to be answered by experimentalists. As it turned out, partons could include the
yet to be introduced gluons as well. With the discovery of asymptotic freedom and the proposal of describing
nuclear forces by an underlying gauge ﬁeld theory called Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), partons came to be
increasingly identiﬁed with quarks and gluons, and that clariﬁed several aspects of the parton model7. Today
physicists have a more sophisticated understanding of partons as the constituents of hadrons—experimental
observations are consistent with only half of the momentum of a hadron being carried by the constituent quarks
(and quark-antiquark pairs from the sea); the other half is carried by the gluons, the gauge ﬁeld quanta of
QCD. In later years, Feynman increasingly used the language of quarks and gluons for hard processes, such as
quark and gluon jet production, a phenomenon that was predicted by him (with Rick Field [23]). In his words
[24], “the more we were guided by the principles of QCD, the better the things ﬁtted, and the better were the
predictions.” Here at last was evidence enough for him that nature required the identiﬁcation of partons with
quarks and gluons!
6
Quantization of Einstein Gravity and Yang-Mills theory
In the mid-1950’s and through the 1960’s, Feynman undertook investigation of the quantization of Einstein’s
theory, because there ought to be a consistent quantum theory of gravity even though there would be no practical
application given the weak strength of the gravitation ﬁeld. “My interest in it is primarily in the relation of one
part of nature to another.” [25] His approach was to begin with a massless spin-2 ﬁeld, the graviton, described by
a symmetric tensor ﬁeld coupled to the energy-momentum tensor of a scalar ﬁeld, in ﬂat Minkowski space-time.
Gauge invariance is manifest in the fact that the graviton has only two polarizations as opposed to the ﬁve
independent spatial components that describe a spin-2 ﬁeld. He succeeded in showing that a consistent theory
naturally includes gauge invariance, and leads to Einstein’s theory. (Here by gauge invariance we mean general
coordinate invariance). This approach to General Relativity is discussed in his ‘Lectures on Gravitation’ [26].
Feynman then embarked on the task of ‘quantizing’ this theory using the method of Feynman diagrams,
given that Newton’s constant and hence gravitational eﬀects are very small. He ﬁrst found that at the one loop
level there was something wrong if one went about calculating with the rules that were suggested by QED. The
covariant gauge answer was not unitary! This happened for not only Einstein’s gravitational theory but also
for the simpler Yang-Mills theory. In a sense this happened because covariant gauge ﬁxing does not eliminate
the time-like components of the graviton and the time-like component of the gluon.
He then invented a method of doing a gauge invariant unitary calculation by expressing a closed loop diagram
in terms of on-shell tree diagrams [27]. Accepting this as the correct way to obtain a gauge invariant and unitary
answer, he found that the diﬀerence with the closed loop Feynman diagram in gravity can be compensated by
a ‘ghost’ particle which has spin 1 but Fermi statistics. He did the same but simpler calculation for the Yang-
Mills theory and discovered the same phenomenon, except that the ghost particle has spin zero [25]. This was
a startling discovery that would steer the course of the subject.
This was subsequently extended to all higher loops by Bryce DeWitt [28], and by Faddeev and Popov
[29], using the Feynman path integral rather than Feynman diagrams. In a gauge theory, the Faddeev-Popov
method is manifestly unitary, and the path integral measure restricted to the covariant gauge ﬁxing condition,
7For example, partons were assumed to behave as almost free particles at high momentum transfers, yet only normal hadrons
were seen in the debris of every deep inelastic scattering process. Normally, for a collection of almost free particles, one might have
expected a parton to shoot out once in while. In QCD, because of asymptotic freedom and conﬁnement, quarks inside a hadron
behave as almost free particles at large momentum transfers, but eventually undergo a series of soft momentum transfer processes
with other quarks to ﬁnally emerge as part of ﬁnal state hadrons.
7

and naturally leads to a non-trivial determinant. The ghost particles of Feynman emerged as auxiliary ﬁelds in
exponentiating the determinant. It should be mentioned that this discussion is restricted to ﬁeld conﬁgurations
near the orbit of the gauge ﬁeld Aµ = 0. As one explores large ﬁeld conﬁgurations ‘simple gauge ﬁxing’ is not
possible in a non-abelian gauge theory [30]. The Lagrangian of the gauge theory, plus the gauge ﬁxing term, plus
the ghosts, exhibits a new symmetry called the BRST (Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin) invariance, and the correct
principle for covariant quantization is BRST invariance. This symmetry has many interesting applications,
including to string theory [31].
Yang-Mills theory is a well deﬁned theory at all length scales. At weak coupling, the theory was shown to
be asymptotically free by Gross and Wilczek, and by Politzer [32]. An exact non-perturbative formulation was
given by Wilson [33], on a hypercubic Euclidean lattice where the degrees of freedom are the group elements on
the lattice links (and not gauge ﬁelds valued in the Lie algebra). A continuum limit consistent with asymptotic
freedom exists. The situation with the quantization of Einstein’s theory is far more complex. Unlike the case
of Yang-Mills theory, where the original classical formulation in terms of a non-Abelian gauge ﬁeld is minimally
modiﬁed to deﬁne a precise relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory, there is no obvious way to deﬁne a quantum theory
of gravity. The diagramatic method which Feynman pioneered fails to give sensible answers. Neither is there a
space-time lattice formulation in 4-dim which leads to a sensible quantum theory of gravity. The only known
formulation which has well deﬁned high-energy (short-distance) properties, and which reproduces Einstein’s
gravity at low energies (long distances), is string theory. One of the main consequences of this ultra-violet
completion of the theory of gravity is that the fundamental degrees of freedom of ‘quantum gravity’ are not
only the gravitons of Einstein’s theory, but other ‘stuﬀ’ called branes as well [31].
7
Quantum Theory of Liquid Helium and Superﬂuidity
Feynman moved to Caltech from Cornell in 1950. During his ﬁrst decade at Caltech, he devoted considerable
time to several outstanding problems in condensed matter physics, including superﬂuidity in liquid helium,
superconductivity and the polaron problem. We summarize here his most signiﬁcant contribution to condensed
matter physics, which had to do with (i) understanding superﬂuidity of Helium-4 and the Landau theory from
a microscopic quantum mechanical point of view; (ii) the presence of quantized vortices in Helium-II, and (iii)
quantum turbulence.
Feynman’s approach to the spectrum and excitations of Helium-II is to discover the
solution of the theory in close contact with experiment, in a sense the wavefunction describing phonons, rotons
and vortices is being built up by a theory-experiment dialogue.
Neutral Helium gas under normal pressure liquiﬁes at a temperature of 4.22K. At a critical temperature
of Tc = 2.176K it undergoes a superﬂuid phase transition, called the λ transition due to the shape of the
speciﬁc heat curve as a function of temperature.
The two phases are named Helium-I and Helium-II, and
Helium-II exhibits superﬂuidity. A phenomenological model to explain experimental facts about Helium-II, the
2-ﬂuid model, was put forward by Landau and also independently by Tisza, while London advocated a Bose-
Einstein condensation at Tc. Landau went ahead and formulated 2-ﬂuid hydrodynamics, which was successful
in explaining many features of Helium-II. In the 2-ﬂuid model, one component is the superﬂuid, and the other
component is the normal ﬂuid comprising of a gas of phonons and rotons.
Feynman undertook to understand and work out a ﬁrst principles understanding of superﬂuidity in the
strongly interacting system of Helium atoms. He wrote 6 papers on this subject during 1953-57 by himself, and
three with his student Michael Cohen. He also wrote an excellent exposition of the subject [36].
7.1
The λ point and below
His ﬁrst paper in the subject was on ‘The Atomic Theory of the λ Transition in Helium’ [34]. He formulated
the partition function of Helium as a path integral for a system of pairwise interacting bosons.
The path
integral was in imaginary time and described the partition function. Now knowing the characteristics of the
Helium atom, he approximated the interatomic interaction as having a hard core, and argued that the eﬀect
of the interaction would be to renormalize the mass of the Helium atom. The path integral then reduced to
that of an almost ‘non-interacting’ system of particles governed by Bose-Einstein statistics. In his own words,
“The physical idea which plays a central role is that in a quantum mechanical Bose liquid the atoms behave
in some respects like free particles.” The approximate partition function which is a sum over the cycles of the
permutation group, maps onto a classical polymer problem. Feynman argued that near the transition point the
partition function is dominated by large cycles, which have a large entropy that can equal and exceed the energy
causing a transition. The mechanism is similar to the Kosterlitz-Thouless-Berezinsky transition in the 2-dim
8

XY model. With the approximations Feynman used, he obtained a transition temperature which was roughly
correct, but the phase transition was of third order. Subsequent more accurate numerical work (decades later)
implemented Feynman’s path integral program (without making the approximations Feynman had made), to
give a quantitative theory of the Helium transition and other properties [35].
A couple of years later in a paper titled ‘Application of Quantum Mechanics to Liquid Helium’ [36], he
gave a physical picture of the phase transition in terms of the proliferation of a few large quantized vortices:
“Then suddenly the rings of very largest length are of importance. The state with one vortex line (or very
few) which winds and winds throughout the liquid like a near approximation to a Jordan curve is no longer
of negligible weight. The superﬂuid is pierced through and through by the vortex line. We are describing the
disorder of Helium-I. At ﬁrst the curve doesn’t make full use of all its orientations and higher entropy. But as
the temperature rises a little more it squeezes into the last corners and pockets of superﬂuid until it has no more
ﬂexibility available. The speciﬁc heat curve drops oﬀfrom the transition to a smooth curve, and the memory
of the possibility that Helium can exhibit quantum properties in a unique way is lost in the profusion of states
and in disorder, as it is for more usual liquids.” Incidentally, in the same paper Feynman discussed quantum
turbulence for the ﬁrst time, in terms of quantized vortices.
The Landau 2-ﬂuid theory has no mention of Bose-Einstein statistics, and was based on the assumption that
there are no other low energy excitations in Helium-II besides density waves (phonons). Feynman recognized
this as a fundamental property of the system, which would explain the mysterious properties of Helium-II, and
set out to understand this from ﬁrst principles [37]. He was also aware that the transition temperature, and
the speciﬁc heat curves of Bose-Einstein condensation of a system of free bosons, are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
those of Helium. All his works on Helium, except the one on the λ transition, used the Schr¨odinger picture
(not path integrals), and based the analysis of the ground state wavefunction and its excitations on physical
arguments involving the variational method.
Two
conﬁgurations
(solid
and dotted) resulting from
large
displacements
(long
arrows) of atoms can ac-
tually be accomplished by
much smaller adjustments
(short arrows) because of
the identity of atoms.
Using elementary reasoning, Feynman argued that the ground state wavefunc-
tion of liquid Helium is non-degenerate, real positive and without nodes. Given
the repulsive nature of the interatomic interaction of Helium, the wavefunction
vanishes if the atoms come within a distance of 2.14˚A. Since the Helium atom
has spin zero, the wavefunction is totally symmetric in the positions of all the
atoms.
He therefore argued that the low energy spectrum consists entirely of
density waves (phonons) with a linear dispersion law. No other long wavelength
(low energy) excitations are allowed by Bose-Einstein statistics. Any other move
of Helium atoms over long distances would be a permutation of the atoms that
would leave the wavefunction unchanged! See illustration from Ref. [36]. This
was the key insight.
The excitation spectrum as argued by Landau from a hydrodynamic point
of view consists of phonons and rotons. The latter are higher mass excitations
with the wave number equal to inverse inter-atomic spacing. To calculate this
spectrum, Feynman set up a variational calculation to derive the Landau curve.
He obtained a formula in terms of the liquid structure factor (2-point function of
the density operator in the ground state), which could explain the shape of the
Landau curve qualitatively but not quantitatively.
To get better quantitative agreement, Feynman and his student Michael Cohen
devised a new trial wavefunction that took into account the ‘back ﬂow’ of the ﬂuid
around the rotons. Feynman’s picture of a roton was that of a ring of Helium atoms so small that only a single
atom could go through it. While the original Feynman wavefunction contained only one quasi-particle operator,
the Feynman-Cohen wavefunction contained two quasi-particle operators.
The Feynman-Cohen theory [38]
considerably improved the agreement with experiment [39]. Perhaps, in order to do better, one will need to
include a higher polynomial of quasi-particle operators8.
7.2
Quantized vortices and quantum turbulence
To incorporate local slow velocity variations of the atoms, Feynman introduced local phases S(r) in the wave-
function, which can account for the velocity v(r) =
¯h
m∇S(r). It turns out that liquid Helium-II does have
vortex excitations as conjectured by Onsager, and discovered independently by Feynman. He went on to give a
qualitative picture of why and how the vortices can lead to a turbulent ﬂow. This eﬀect was observed shortly
8We thank H. R. Krishnamurthy for a discussion of this point.
9

afterwards by Viven [40]. Vortices interacting with each other, and with other excitations namely rotons, play a
fundamental role in the description of turbulent ﬂow in Helium. This is a very current and fascinating subject
in quantum ﬂuid dynamics [41].
8
Computation
Feynman had a life-long interest in mathematical puzzles, tricks that speeded up complicated calculations as
well as novel ways to carry out integrations. This interest naturally expanded to cover design of algorithms and
eﬃcient use of computers. While still a graduate student at the Princeton university, Feynman was recruited
to work on the Manhattan project at Los Alamos. One of his assignments there was to look after the ‘IBM
group’, calculating the energy release for diﬀerent designs of the plutonium implosion bomb. They used decks
of program cards to carry out the calculations on the IBM machines, but the speed was much slower than
required.
Feynman dramatically boosted this performance, ﬁguring out strategies of parallel computation,
and the problem was solved in time. Several independent computational threads were executed together, by
interspersing diﬀerent sets of cards with a phase lag. Also, with proper organization, a change in a parameter
(or a mistake in the calculation) at some step in the calculation aﬀected only nearby steps; so only those nearby
steps needed reevaluation instead of the whole calculation. Feynman also constructed a fast iterative method
to calculate logarithms bit by bit, which was implemented years later on the Connection Machine.
In the 1950’s, rapid advances in molecular biology prompted Feynman to think about manipulating and
controlling things on a tiny scale. His inspirational talk “There’s plenty of room at the bottom” was an open
invitation to enter a new ﬁeld of physics [42]. He pointed out that the entire Encyclopedia Britannica can
be written on the head of a pin, by reducing the size of writing by a factor of 25000, and a little dot would
still contain 1000 atoms in its area. He argued that improved photo- and ion-lithography techniques would be
able to do that, and so pack enormous amount of information in a small space. He emphasized that there are
no hurdles of principle in reducing the resolution of an electron microscope, or the size of mechanical devices
and computer circuits, all the way to the atomic scale. He stressed that the tiny machines would not just be
a scaled down version of the macroscopic ones, but would require redesign in accordance with physical laws,
and he held that out as a challenge. To motivate research in this ﬁeld, which is now called nanotechnology, he
personally oﬀered two prizes of $1000—one to the ﬁrst person who prints the page of a book with the linear
scale reduced by a factor of 25000, and the other to the ﬁrst person who makes an operating electric motor
that is only 1/64 inch cube. The second prize was awarded within a year to Bill McLellan, and Feynman was
slightly disappointed that no major new technique was developed for it. The ﬁrst prize awarded a quarter of a
century later to Tom Newman, who accomplished it using electron beam lithography.
Feynman loved to get involved in the nitty-gritty details of the projects that he liked. To be close to his son
Carl, who became a computer scientist, Feynman worked as a consultant for the Thinking Machines Corporation
in the summer of 1983. They developed the Connection Machine, which was a massively parallel computer
working in the single-instruction-multiple-data mode. The machine was designed as a 20-dimensional hypercube,
and Feynman was assigned the job to design the router that would allow the processors to communicate with
each other. To avoid traﬃc-jams, the messages needed to be held in buﬀers until the required path became
free. Feynman converted the message passing problem to a set of partial diﬀerential equations, and came up
with a solution that required ﬁve buﬀers per chip. That was better than the seven buﬀers per chip solution
obtained by the engineers using conventional discrete analysis. It had to be ultimately used because the small
chips could accommodate only ﬁve buﬀers, and it worked.
In his later years, Feynman became interested in the potentialities and the limitations of computers, as
determined by the laws of physics, speciﬁcally quantum physics.
In 1982, he taught a course at Caltech
titled ‘The Physics of Computation’, together with John Hopﬁeld (a biologist) and Carver Mead (a computer
scientist). The syllabus of that course was vague, and the lecturers covered various topics in a rather chaotic
manner, often without knowing what would come next. At times, Feynman talked about what he had thought
of the night before while falling asleep. Three diﬀerent view-points, and open critique of each other’s analysis,
made a thrilling combination, and many students religiously attended the course. In this environment, the
course material rapidly grew in content, and one course subsequently split into three courses. What Feynman
talked about developed into ‘Quantum Computation’, what Hopﬁeld discussed became ‘Neural Networks’, and
what Mead talked about led to ‘Neuromorphic Systems’.
After the split, Feynman titled his course as ‘Potentialities and Limitations of Computing Machines’. He
took help of several guest lecturers to introduce various topics.
Then in his inimitable style, proceeded to
develop the subject from his own perspective, without worrying about what all was already known. A reﬁned
10

version of what was taught in that course, and the exciting ideas that developed from it, is now available as
two excellent books [43, 44]. In particular, the concept of quantum computers developed there has now become
a thriving ﬁeld of research.
Feynman’s motivation in pursuing the subject of quantum computation was two-fold. The ﬁrst was the
realization that with shrinking size of its elementary components, sooner or later, the computer technology
will inevitably encounter the dynamics of the atomic scale. The laws that apply there are those of quantum
mechanics and not those of electrical circuits. The classical computational framework based on Boolean algebra
is inadequate in the quantum regime. Some aspects have to be generalized, while some others need reformulation.
Quantum objects possess both ‘particle-like’ and ‘wave-like’ properties—the discrete eigenstates that form the
Hilbert space basis as well as the superposition principle that allows for simultaneous existence of multiple
components. In what way would this combination alter the axioms of the classical information theory, and in
what way would that change the design and the performance of computers? Feynman wanted to explore that.
The second motivation was that quantum computers would be ideal for simulation of physical systems.
In Feynman’s own words, “Nature isn’t classical, dammit, and if you want to make a simulation of nature,
you’d better make it quantum mechanical, and by golly it’s a wonderful problem, because it doesn’t look easy.”
Feynman was aware that classical numerical investigations of many body quantum systems and quantum ﬁeld
theories, using importance sampling methods to sum over contributions of various allowed conﬁgurations (e.g.
Monte Carlo calculations in lattice QCD), are highly ineﬃcient. He knew that a quantum computer would sum
up many such contributions in one go, as superposition in his path integral formulation of quantum dynamics,
and produce much better results. He wanted to realize this advantage, although he did not quantify it in terms
of what is called computational complexity. Another aspect that he did not deal with was imperfections in the
physical device components, and what would be required to make a quantum computer fault tolerant. A decade
passed before computer scientists came up with answers to these questions, that the quantum advantage in
computational complexity can be exponential in the input size, and that error correction procedures can allow
the computer to work for as long as one wishes provided that the error rate is below a speciﬁc threshold, and
that is when research in the subject really took oﬀ.
Feynman looked up on the subject of computation as engineering. The laws of physics are well-established,
and the task is all about converting the known science to useful technology, i.e. make something to do something.
He wanted to ﬁgure out the limits the laws of physics placed on computation—what we can and cannot do with
computers and why. He was also perplexed by the exponential growth of computational resources in tackling
hard problems on present-day computers, and wondered whether human intelligence can get around that. In
his lectures, he described the computer as a ‘ﬁle clerk’, who most of the time shuﬄes data from one place to
another and does some processing of information intermittently. This analogy is suitable for explaining many
concepts: computer organization, instructions, hierarchy of languages, ﬁnite state machines as well as universal
Turing machines. In discussing formal computer science topics such as computability, information theory and
coding, he skipped many details but ﬁrmly emphasized the essentials needed in practice. He illustrated reversible
computation and constraints of thermodynamics of computing, by constructing and working out simple examples
in his own style. His original contribution was of course about designing quantum computers. He explained how
quantum interactions can implement reversible logic operations, constructed a Hamiltonian that would execute
a set of instructions step by step, and pointed out that quantum computers will have novel capabilities because
certain quantum correlations cannot be simulated by a local probabilistic classical computer.
Feynman’s course was largely treated as curiosity, and no one came forward to teach it after he taught it
for several years. Still he was very keen that his lectures on computation be published, just like several of
the courses that he taught at Caltech were. Tony Hey did the painstaking job superbly, guided by Feynman’s
notebooks and tapes of the lectures. The two books that came out posthumously [43, 44] are now pioneering
contributions to a ﬁeld with tremendous technological potential.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dipan Ghosh and Swaminathan Kailas for inviting this article for Physics News. We
thank Rajan Gupta for providing a copy of his homework assignment corrected by Feynman, and Sandip Trivedi
for sharing his reminiscences of Feynman. The images of Feynman that we have used in this article are taken
from various internet resources. SRW would like to acknowledge the Infosys Foundation Homi Bhabha Chair
at ICTS-TIFR.
11

My Fond Memories of Feynman as a Teacher
I arrived at Caltech, in Fall 1980 as a graduate student in High Energy Physics. As I familiarized myself with
the new environment, I learned many stories about Richard Feynman, not all of them charitable, and how
the Caltech community absolutely adored him. He was suﬀering from cancer at that time, but the medical
treatment he received kept him going. The following story of my interaction with him illustrates his persistent
hunt for innovative solutions to physics problems, as well as his irrepressible curiosity and generosity.
I took the course ‘Topics in Theoretical Physics’ taught by Feynman in Spring 1983. Feynman discussed
his ideas about QCD in that course. In the later part of this course, Feynman decided to talk about what
would happen to QCD at ﬁnite temperature. He was using a ﬂux tube picture to describe conﬁnement in
QCD [46], and argued that the ﬂuctuations of the ﬂux tube with increasing temperature would increase the
entropy and produce a transition to the deconﬁned phase. This was in analogy to his work on behavior
of vortices in liquid He, which I was not aware of. I was working on lattice gauge theories at that time,
and pointed out to him that the situation for SU(2) and SU(3) gauge theories was quite diﬀerent.
The
deconﬁnement transition is of second order for SU(2), but of ﬁrst order for SU(3). The diﬀerence is due to
the the center symmetries Z(2) and Z(3) of the gauge groups, which control the ﬁnite temperature dynamics
of the Wilson line, and Monte Carlo calculations have conﬁrmed it. Feynman wanted a physical picture, and
not a lattice QCD description in terms of the abstract Wilson line. I argued that a description using the ﬂux
tube connecting a quark and an antiquark cannot be the full story. The baryons would have to play a role,
even though they were too heavy compared to the transition temperature. Our arguments did not converge
for a few lectures, because we could not adapt them to each-other’s language. After one such inconclusive
discussion in the lecture, I left for lunch. When I had gone just outside the Lauritsen laboratory building,
a student informed me that Feynman wanted to tell me something. So I returned to the building, entering
at the bottom of the stairwell. Feynman was waiting at the top. He shouted, frantically waving his arms,
“Percolation, percolation!”, and went back to his oﬃce. I was too stunned to say anything. I met him later
in the day, and he asked me to make a model of this picture. I did that, explaining how the dynamics of the
same Z(3) center symmetry governs the baryons as well as the Wilson line. Feynman was happy with this
result, and his secretary (Helen Tuck) gave me the privilege of calling him at his home to discuss physics. I
prepared a draft of the paper, and asked Feynman about including him as an author. He declined, but also
said that he would proof-read the paper. He carefully went through the draft, made some changes in what I
had written, and then the paper was published [45].
Closer to my graduation, I asked Feynman whether he would write a letter of recommendation for me. He
said “with pleasure”, and that was good enough for me. He also became my thesis examiner. My thesis was
on ‘Monte Carlo Renormalization Group for Lattice QCD’. He was not impressed by the brute force numerical
simulations using a lot of computational power, and used to remark with a chuckle “make a quantum computer
and all your problems will be solved”.
Apoorva and Feynman
Feynman often attended the convocation ceremony, and he was
present on my convocation too.
I was a member of the Caltech
Men’s Glee Club, which was to perform at the beginning of the
ceremony. On getting the cue, I strode right down the middle of
the congregation to the back of the stage, sang “Hallelujah”, and
then returned to my seat. I met Feynman after the ceremony. He
asked me whether my name had any meaning. I said, “Yes, it is
an adjective.
Can you guess?” He immediately replied, “Related
to what, truth, beauty?” I said no, it means “unprecedented”. He
smiled, and I had my photograph taken with him. After leaving
Caltech, I could not interact with him again, unfortunately. I learned
about his passing away, when I was working at CERN.
—Apoorva D. Patel
12

Feynman’s comments on Rajan Gupta’s homework assignment
A Conversation with Feynman
Feynman in 1986
In 1986, I visited Caltech for a couple of weeks because my friend and colleague
Sumit Das was a post-doctoral fellow there. The memory of my meeting with
Feynman is still very vivid.
I was keen to speak with Feynman, so I kept
pacing outside his oﬃce till a surge of courage took me right in. The oﬃce
was not well-lit, and the furniture was of a darkish hue. He was sitting there
in his casual style, and was very welcoming when I asked to speak with him.
My reason was that I became a physicist because of his Lectures on Physics!
He called me in and had me sit near him, and asked, “What are you working
on?” I replied, “String theory.” He asked me immediately, almost as a reaction,
“What are the important problems of particle physics?” My answer included
calculation of the parameters of the Standard Model that would explain the
mass hierarchy of leptons; the smallness of CP violation etc.. He was satisﬁed,
and then he wanted to know about some interesting result in string theory.
I was surprised, especially because Caltech had distinguished string theorists,
but decided to tell him about Dan Friedan’s derivation of Einstein’s equations
as the vanishing of the beta function using the sigma model approach. I started
out by saying, “Let us consider the Feynman path integral,” and he snapped
back laughing, “O, what is that?” Continuing, I presented a short derivation of
the beta function equation. He was very impressed by this connection: “You
mean renormalization stops!, and gives Einstein’s equations.”
He mentioned that he had his worries about string theory, but then he had been wrong on many occa-
sions in his career, including electro-weak uniﬁcation. So I should not be discouraged. He then started to
explain to me his work on the existence of a mass gap in 2+1 dim pure Yang-Mills theory, using large gauge
transformations and a variational method similar to the one he had used for explaining superﬂuidity in liquid
Helium. He drew an analogy between large gauge transformations in the gauge theory and Bose statistics in
liquid Helium [46]. This was a truly original way to approach the problem. It was a wonderful discussion
because my work with Sumit Das from a few years ago had applied the self-consistent method of instantons
in the Euclidean path integral to the same problem [47]. After the discussion he remarked, “The 4-dim case
is too diﬃcult, because of the goddam logarithms!, and that time is running out for me.” I did not quite
understand the import of the last statement at that time. Meeting Feynman was a truly very intense and
inspiring experience.
—Spenta R. Wadia
13

Reminiscences of my Interactions with Feynman
As a beginning graduate student, I was part of Feynman’s study group. The group included my batchmates
Arun Gupta and Olivier Espinoza (now deceased), some senior students such as Alexios Polychronakos (who
left at some point after graduation), and some undergraduates like Vineer Bhansali.
Feynman’s idea was to use the progress in integrability in two dimensions to study fragmentation or
hadronisation in QCD. Consider a high energy scattering process, which gives rise to a quark or gluon moving
at high energy that fragments as it moves away from the interaction region. There is one preferred direction
along which the quark or gluon moves, where the momentum is high and the physics is ‘hard’, and two
transverse directions where it is ‘soft’. Feynman’s idea was to separate these directions. Since high energy
physics is simple in QCD due to asymptotic freedom, the hard physics would be easy to deal with. That
would then leave the two transverse directions where the physics is soft and non-trivial, and perhaps the
progress in integrability could be used here to understand the process of fragmentation.
The ﬁrst, and perhaps the most important lesson, for a beginning graduate student like me was just how
thorough Feynman was. He believed that to understand what had been achieved in the study of integrability,
we should simply solve all known integrable models! The Bethe ansatz, if I recall correctly, worked well, but
only for some models. Feynman had already worked out these cases by the time I joined, and had detailed
meticulous notes, a model for how careful and thorough one should be.
However, and this is where things stood when I started interacting with him, the Bethe ansatz technique
did not directly work for the Baxter 6 and 8 vertex models. Feynman explained the 6 vertex model to us, and
his instructions were for us to try and solve it without looking at Baxter’s solution, already in print. “I have
told you all you need to know,” he said. We met week after week on Wednesday afternoons and discussed the
problem. We students made very little progress. Amongst the three of us, Arun made some headway, but
we were still far from solving the model. It did not help that Baxter had been awarded the Heinemann prize
that year for solving the 6 and 8 vertex models!
Feynman was remarkably patient and spent a lot of time explaining the solutions that he had ﬁgured
out using the Bethe ansatz technique for various models (which were all special cases of Baxter’s models).
We also went over a review on integrable models written by Hank Thacker, who Feynman always called
“Thaxter” (he also refered to the Zamolodchikov brothers as Zamaldovich and Zamaldovich driving us to
splits of laughter). The high point for me of these sessions though were his digressions where he explained
all kinds of physics to us. Occasionally, the discussions would extend over dinner—for which Feynman often
generously paid. I remember one great dinner at a Mexican restaurant on Colorado Boulevard, where he
explained the spin-statistics theorem, using a belt which he took oﬀfrom his pants, while exclaiming loudly
to the waiter that she need not worry for he wasn’t going to disrobe any further! This belt trick of Feynman
is of course well-known and also discussed in his Dirac lecture.
To come back to the Baxter models, one day Feynman called us to his oﬃce. His eyes were shinning. “I
have solved it!” he exclaimed. “Get me some multi-colored chalk,” he yelled to his secretary Helen. What
followed was pure Feynman genius, in equal measure physics and showmanship of the highest order. The
key, as Feynman explained, was to look at the lattice not in the standard fashion, as we had been doing,
but at 45 degrees. Then due to the presence of particle number conservation in the 6 vertex case, a solution
easily presented itself in a few lines of algebra, and the elliptic functions of Baxter’s solution appeared almost
miraculously! The underlying reason for the simpliﬁcation at 45 degrees was that the system had eﬀectively
massless degrees of freedom. This was pure magic for me! Later on, experts told me that Feynman’s solution
is probably closely related to a well-known technique in integrable models involving corner transfer matrices.
I have not followed up on this, but I am quite sure that Feynman did not know about this beforehand.
Feynman’s last blackboard
We students were then sent oﬀto solve the 8 vertex model.
This was more complicated because there was no particle number
conservation, and particles could be created and destroyed.
But
Feynman was optimistic as ever. “I invented all the tricks on how
to deal with the creation and destruction of particles in QED,” he
said to us with a wink, “We will surely get there.” Sadly, Feynman
fell quite ill soon thereafter, and our meetings grew infrequent. We
never did solve the 8 vertex model, although we did sneak a look
at Baxter’s work, and ﬁgured out the solution that way. Feynman’s
dream of using integrability for QCD remained incomplete in our
hands, and he passed away a few months later.
—Sandip P. Trivedi
14

Richard P. Feynman’s speech at the Nobel Banquet, 10 December 1965
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies and Gentlemen.
The work I have done has, already, been adequately rewarded and recognized.
Imagination reaches out repeatedly trying to achieve some higher level of
understanding, until suddenly I ﬁnd myself momentarily alone before one new
corner of nature’s pattern of beauty and true majesty revealed. That was my
reward.
Then, having fashioned tools to make access easier to the new level, I
see these tools used by other men straining their imaginations against further
mysteries beyond. There, are my votes of recognition.
Then comes the prize, and a deluge of messages. Reports of fathers turn-
ing excitedly with newspapers in hand to wives; of daughters running up and
down the apartment house ringing neighbors’ doorbells with news; victorious
cries of “I told you so” by those having no technical knowledge—their success-
ful prediction being based on faith alone; from friends, from relatives, from
students, from former teachers, from scientiﬁc colleagues, from total strangers;
formal commendations, silly jokes, parties, presents; a multitude of messages in
a multitude of forms.
But, in each I saw the same two common elements. I saw in each, joy; and I saw aﬀection (you see,
whatever modesty I may have had has been completely swept away in recent days).
The prize was a signal to permit them to express, and me to learn about, their feelings. Each joy, though
transient thrill, repeated in so many places amounts to a considerable sum of human happiness. And, each
note of aﬀection released thus one upon another has permitted me to realize a depth of love for my friends
and acquaintances, which I had never felt so poignantly before.
For this, I thank Alfred Nobel and the many who worked so hard to carry out his wishes in this particular
way.
And so, you Swedish people, with your honors, and your trumpets, and your king—forgive me. For I
understand at last—such things provide entrance to the heart. Used by a wise and peaceful people they can
generate good feeling, even love, among men, even in lands far beyond your own. For that lesson, I thank
you. Tack!
15

References
[1] http://www.richardfeynman.com/
[2] http://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/
[3] https://feynman100.caltech.edu/
[4] J. Gleick, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (Pantheon Books, 1992).
[5] J. Mehra, The Beat of a Diﬀerent Drum: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (Oxford University
Press, 1994).
[6] J. Gribbin and M. Gribbin, Richard Feynman: A Life in Science (Dutton, 1997).
[7] R. P. Feynman, The Meaning of It All: Thoughts of a Citizen-Scientist (Addison-Wesley, 1998).
[8] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uljATTG58TY
[9] https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1965/feynman/speech/
[10] J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, Classical Electrodynamics in Terms of Direct Interparticle Action, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 21 (1949) 425-433.
[11] R. P. Feynman, The Theory of Positrons, Phys. Rev. 76 (1949) 749-759.
[12] E. C. G. St¨uckelberg, La m´ecanique du point mat´eriel en th´eorie de relativit´e et en th´eorie des quants,
Helv. Phys. Acta 15 (1942) 23-37.
[13] R. P. Feynman, Relativistic cut-oﬀfor Quantum Electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. 74 (1948) 1430-1438.
[14] R. P. Feynman, Space-Time Approach to Quantum Electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. 76 (1949) 769-789.
[15] R. P. Feynman, The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University (1942). Pub-
lished as Feynman’s Thesis: A New Approach to Quantum Theory, Ed. L. M. Brown, (World Scientiﬁc,
2005).
[16] R. P. Feynman, Space-Time Approach to Non-Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 20 (1948)
367-387.
[17] R. P. Feynmand and A. R. Hibbs, Path Integrals and Quantum Mechanics, (McGraw-Hill, 1965).
[18] P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Fourth Edition (Oxford University Press, 1958).
[19] R. P. Feynman amd M. Gell-Mann, Theory of Fermi Interactions, Phys. Rev. 109 (1958) 193-198.
[20] E. C. G. Sudarshan and R. E. Marshak, Origin of the Universal V-A Theory, In Proceedings of “50 Years
of Weak Interactions”, Wingspread Conference, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin (1984), pp.
1-15
[21] J. D. Bjorken, Asymptotic Sum Rules at Inﬁnite Momentum, Phys. Rev. 179 (1969) 1547-1553; Inequality
for Backward Electron- and Muon-Nucleon Scattering at High Momentum Transfer, Phys. Rev. 163 (1967)
1767-1769.
[22] R. P. Feynman, Photon-hadron Interactions, (CRC Press, 1972).
[23] R. D. Field and R. P. Feynman Quark elastic scattering as a source of high-transverse-momentum mesons,
Phys. Rev. D15 (1977) 2590-2615.
[24] R. P. Feynman, R. D. Field and G. C. Fox, Quantum-chromodynamic Approach for the Large-transverse-
momentum Production of Particles and Jets, Phys. Rev. D17 (1978) 3320-3343.
[25] R. P. Feynman, Quantum Theory of Gravitation, Acta Physica Polonica 24 (1963) 697-722; R. P. Feynman
Problems in quantizing the gravitational ﬁeld and massless Yang-Mills ﬁeld, in Magic without Magic: John
Archibald Wheeler, Ed. J. R. Klauder (W. H. Freeman & Co, 1973).
16

[26] R. P. Feynman, F. B. Morinigo and W. Wagner, Feynman Lectures on Gravitation, (Addison-Wesley, 1995).
[27] R. P. Feynman, Closed loop and tree diagrams, in Magic without Magic: John Archibald Wheeler, Ed. J.
R. Klauder (W. H. Freeman & Co, 1973).
[28] B. DeWitt, Quantum Theory of Gravity II: The manifest covariant theory, Phys. Rev. 162 (1967) 1195–
1239.
[29] L. D. Faddeev and V. N. Popov, Feynman Diagrams for the Yang-Mills Field, Phys. Lett. B25 (1967) 29-30.
[30] S. R. Wadia and T. Yoneya, The Role of Surface Variables in the Vacuum Structure of Yang-Mills Theory,
Phys. Lett. 66B (1977) 341-345; V. N. Gribov, Quantization of Nonabelian Gauge Theories, Nucl. Phys.
B139 (1978) 1.
[31] J. Polchinski, String Theory: Vol 1 and 2, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics (1998).
[32] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-abelian Gauge Theories, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973)
1343-1346; H. D. Politzer, Reliable Perturbative Results for Strong Interactions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973)
1346-1349.
[33] K. G. Wilson, Conﬁnement of Quarks, Phys. Rev. D10 (1974) 2445-2459.
[34] R. P. Feynman, Atomic Theory of the Lambda Transition in Helium, Phys. Rev. 90 (1953) 1291-1301.
[35] D. M. Ceperley, Path Integrals in the Theory of Condensed Helium, Rev. Mod. Phys. 67 (1995) 279-355.
[36] R. P. Feynman, Application of Quantum Mechanics to Liquid Helium, Progress in Low Temperature
Physics: Vol 1, (North-Holland, 1955), pp. 17-53.
[37] R. P. Feynman, Atomic Theory of the Liquid Helium near Absolute Zero, Phys. Rev. 91 (1953) 1301-1308;
R. P. Feynman, Atomic Theory of the 2-Fluid Model of Liquid Helium, Phys. Rev. 94 (1954) 262-277.
[38] R. P. Feynman and M. Cohen, Energy Spectrum of the Excitations in Liquid Helium, Phys. Rev. 102
(1956) 1189-1204; M. Cohen and R. P. Feynman, Theory of Inelastic Scattering of Cold Neutrons from
Liquid Helium, Phys. Rev. 107 (1957) 13-24.
[39] P. Nozieres and D. Pines, Quantum Theory of Liquids: Vol II, Section 3.5, (CRC Press, 1990).
[40] W. F. Vinen, Mutual Friction in a Heat Current in Liquid Helium II, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 240 (1957) 114-127.
[41] W. F. Viven and L. Skrbek, Quantum Turbulence Generated by Oscillating Structures, PNAS 111, Suppl. 1
(2014) 4699-4706; C. F. Barenghi, L. Skrbek and K.R. Sreenivasan, Introduction to Quantum Turbulence,
PNAS 111, Suppl. 1 (2014) 4647-4652.
[42] R. P. Feynman, There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom, Talk at the 1959 Annual Meeting of the American
Physical Society, Published in Caltech’s Engineering and Science (1960).
[43] R. P. Feynman, Feynman Lectures on Computation, Eds. A. J. G. Hey and R. W. Allen, (Perseus Books,
1996).
[44] Feynman and Computation: Exploring the Limits of Computers, Ed. A. J. G. Hey, (Perseus Books, 1999).
[45] A. Patel, A Flux Tube Model of the Finite Temperature Deconﬁning Transition in QCD, Nucl. Phys. B243
(1984) 411-422.
[46] R.P. Feynman, The Qualitative Behavior of Yang-Mills Theory in 2+1 Dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B188
(1981) 479-512.
[47] S. R. Wadia, Gauge Theories of Quark Conﬁnement in 2+1 Dim: A Comparative Study of SU(2) Yang-
Mills and Yang-Mills-Higgs, Particles and Fields 2, Eds. A. Z. Capri and A. N. Kamal, (Plenum Press,
1983); S. R. Das and S. R. Wadia, Quark conﬁnement and dual representation in (2+1) dimensional pure
Yang-Mills theory, Phys. Rev. D 53 (1996) 5856.
17
